GEN 1:1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
GEN 1:2 Now the earth was without shape and empty, and darkness was over the surface of the watery deep, but the Spirit of God was moving over the surface of the water.
GEN 1:3 God said, “Let there be light.” And there was light!
GEN 1:4 God saw that the light was good, so God separated the light from the darkness.
GEN 1:5 God called the light “day” and the darkness “night.” There was evening, and there was morning, marking the first day.
GEN 1:6 God said, “Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters and let it separate water from water.
GEN 1:7 So God made the expanse and separated the water under the expanse from the water above it. It was so.
GEN 1:8 God called the expanse “sky.” There was evening, and there was morning, a second day.
GEN 1:9 God said, “Let the water under the sky be gathered to one place and let dry ground appear.” It was so.
GEN 1:10 God called the dry ground “land” and the gathered waters he called “seas.” God saw that it was good.
GEN 1:11 God said, “Let the land produce vegetation: plants yielding seeds according to their kinds, and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds.” It was so.
GEN 1:12 The land produced vegetation – plants yielding seeds according to their kinds, and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds. God saw that it was good.
GEN 1:13 There was evening, and there was morning, a third day.
GEN 1:14 God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of the sky to separate the day from the night, and let them be signs to indicate seasons and days and years,
GEN 1:15 and let them serve as lights in the expanse of the sky to give light on the earth.” It was so.
GEN 1:16 God made two great lights – the greater light to rule over the day and the lesser light to rule over the night. He made the stars also.
GEN 1:17 God placed the lights in the expanse of the sky to shine on the earth,
GEN 1:18 to preside over the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. God saw that it was good.
GEN 1:19 There was evening, and there was morning, a fourth day.
GEN 1:20 God said, “Let the water swarm with swarms of living creatures and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the sky.”
GEN 1:21 God created the great sea creatures and every living and moving thing with which the water swarmed, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. God saw that it was good.
GEN 1:22 God blessed them and said, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the water in the seas, and let the birds multiply on the earth.”
GEN 1:23 There was evening, and there was morning, a fifth day.
GEN 1:24 God said, “Let the land produce living creatures according to their kinds: cattle, creeping things, and wild animals, each according to its kind.” It was so.
GEN 1:25 God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the cattle according to their kinds, and all the creatures that creep along the ground according to their kinds. God saw that it was good.
GEN 1:26 Then God said, “Let us make humankind in our image, after our likeness, so they may rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over all the creatures that move on the earth.”
GEN 1:27 God created humankind in his own image, in the image of God he created them, male and female he created them.
GEN 1:28 God blessed them and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply! Fill the earth and subdue it! Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and every creature that moves on the ground.”
GEN 1:29 Then God said, “I now give you every seed-bearing plant on the face of the entire earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for food.
GEN 1:30 And to all the animals of the earth, and to every bird of the air, and to all the creatures that move on the ground – everything that has the breath of life in it – I give every green plant for food.” It was so.
GEN 1:31 God saw all that he had made – and it was very good! There was evening, and there was morning, the sixth day.
GEN 2:1 The heavens and the earth were completed with everything that was in them.
GEN 2:2 By the seventh day God finished the work that he had been doing, and he ceased on the seventh day all the work that he had been doing.
GEN 2:3 God blessed the seventh day and made it holy because on it he ceased all the work that he had been doing in creation.
GEN 2:4 This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created – when the Lord God made the earth and heavens.
GEN 2:5 Now no shrub of the field had yet grown on the earth, and no plant of the field had yet sprouted, for the Lord God had not caused it to rain on the earth, and there was no man to cultivate the ground.
GEN 2:6 Springs would well up from the earth and water the whole surface of the ground.
GEN 2:7 The Lord God formed the man from the soil of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being.
GEN 2:8 The Lord God planted an orchard in the east, in Eden; and there he placed the man he had formed.
GEN 2:9 The Lord God made all kinds of trees grow from the soil, every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food. (Now the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil were in the middle of the orchard.)
GEN 2:10 Now a river flows from Eden to water the orchard, and from there it divides into four headstreams.
GEN 2:11 The name of the first is Pishon; it runs through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold.
GEN 2:12 (The gold of that land is pure; pearls and lapis lazuli are also there).
GEN 2:13 The name of the second river is Gihon; it runs through the entire land of Cush.
GEN 2:14 The name of the third river is Tigris; it runs along the east side of Assyria. The fourth river is the Euphrates.
GEN 2:15 The Lord God took the man and placed him in the orchard in Eden to care for it and to maintain it.
GEN 2:16 Then the Lord God commanded the man, “You may freely eat fruit from every tree of the orchard,
GEN 2:17 but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat from it you will surely die.”
GEN 2:18 The Lord God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a companion for him who corresponds to him.”
GEN 2:19 The Lord God formed out of the ground every living animal of the field and every bird of the air. He brought them to the man to see what he would name them, and whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name.
GEN 2:20 So the man named all the animals, the birds of the air, and the living creatures of the field, but for Adam no companion who corresponded to him was found.
GEN 2:21 So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was asleep, he took part of the man’s side and closed up the place with flesh.
GEN 2:22 Then the Lord God made a woman from the part he had taken out of the man, and he brought her to the man.
GEN 2:23 Then the man said, “This one at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; this one will be called ‘woman,’ for she was taken out of man.”
GEN 2:24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and unites with his wife, and they become a new family.
GEN 2:25 The man and his wife were both naked, but they were not ashamed.
GEN 3:1 Now the serpent was more shrewd than any of the wild animals that the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, “Is it really true that God said, ‘You must not eat from any tree of the orchard’?”
GEN 3:2 The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat of the fruit from the trees of the orchard;
GEN 3:3 but concerning the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the orchard God said, ‘You must not eat from it, and you must not touch it, or else you will die.’”
GEN 3:4 The serpent said to the woman, “Surely you will not die,
GEN 3:5 for God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will open and you will be like divine beings who know good and evil.”
GEN 3:6 When the woman saw that the tree produced fruit that was good for food, was attractive to the eye, and was desirable for making one wise, she took some of its fruit and ate it. She also gave some of it to her husband who was with her, and he ate it.
GEN 3:7 Then the eyes of both of them opened, and they knew they were naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves.
GEN 3:8 Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God moving about in the orchard at the breezy time of the day, and they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the orchard.
GEN 3:9 But the Lord God called to the man and said to him, “Where are you?”
GEN 3:10 The man replied, “I heard you moving about in the orchard, and I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid.”
GEN 3:11 And the Lord God said, “Who told you that you were naked? Did you eat from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?”
GEN 3:12 The man said, “The woman whom you gave me, she gave me some fruit from the tree and I ate it.”
GEN 3:13 So the Lord God said to the woman, “What is this you have done?” And the woman replied, “The serpent tricked me, and I ate.”
GEN 3:14 The Lord God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this, cursed are you above all the wild beasts and all the living creatures of the field! On your belly you will crawl and dust you will eat all the days of your life.
GEN 3:15 And I will put hostility between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring; her offspring will attack your head, and you will attack her offspring’s heel.”
GEN 3:16 To the woman he said, “I will greatly increase your labor pains; with pain you will give birth to children. You will want to control your husband, but he will dominate you.”
GEN 3:17 But to Adam he said, “Because you obeyed your wife and ate from the tree about which I commanded you, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground thanks to you; in painful toil you will eat of it all the days of your life.
GEN 3:18 It will produce thorns and thistles for you, but you will eat the grain of the field.
GEN 3:19 By the sweat of your brow you will eat food until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you will return.”
GEN 3:20 The man named his wife Eve, because she was the mother of all the living.
GEN 3:21 The Lord God made garments from skin for Adam and his wife, and clothed them.
GEN 3:22 And the Lord God said, “Now that the man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil, he must not be allowed to stretch out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live forever.”
GEN 3:23 So the Lord God expelled him from the orchard in Eden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken.
GEN 3:24 When he drove the man out, he placed on the eastern side of the orchard in Eden angelic sentries who used the flame of a whirling sword to guard the way to the tree of life.
GEN 4:1 Now the man had marital relations with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain. Then she said, “I have created a man just as the Lord did!”
GEN 4:2 Then she gave birth to his brother Abel. Abel took care of the flocks, while Cain cultivated the ground.
GEN 4:3 At the designated time Cain brought some of the fruit of the ground for an offering to the Lord.
GEN 4:4 But Abel brought some of the firstborn of his flock – even the fattest of them. And the Lord was pleased with Abel and his offering,
GEN 4:5 but with Cain and his offering he was not pleased. So Cain became very angry, and his expression was downcast.
GEN 4:6 Then the Lord said to Cain, “Why are you angry, and why is your expression downcast?
GEN 4:7 Is it not true that if you do what is right, you will be fine? But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at the door. It desires to dominate you, but you must subdue it.”
GEN 4:8 Cain said to his brother Abel, “Let’s go out to the field.” While they were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.
GEN 4:9 Then the Lord said to Cain, “Where is your brother Abel?” And he replied, “I don’t know! Am I my brother’s guardian?”
GEN 4:10 But the Lord said, “What have you done? The voice of your brother’s blood is crying out to me from the ground!
GEN 4:11 So now, you are banished from the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand.
GEN 4:12 When you try to cultivate the ground it will no longer yield its best for you. You will be a homeless wanderer on the earth.”
GEN 4:13 Then Cain said to the Lord, “My punishment is too great to endure!
GEN 4:14 Look! You are driving me off the land today, and I must hide from your presence. I will be a homeless wanderer on the earth; whoever finds me will kill me.”
GEN 4:15 But the Lord said to him, “All right then, if anyone kills Cain, Cain will be avenged seven times as much.” Then the Lord put a special mark on Cain so that no one who found him would strike him down.
GEN 4:16 So Cain went out from the presence of the Lord and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
GEN 4:17 Cain had marital relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. Cain was building a city, and he named the city after his son Enoch.
GEN 4:18 To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael. Mehujael was the father of Methushael, and Methushael was the father of Lamech.
GEN 4:19 Lamech took two wives for himself; the name of the first was Adah, and the name of the second was Zillah.
GEN 4:20 Adah gave birth to Jabal; he was the first of those who live in tents and keep livestock.
GEN 4:21 The name of his brother was Jubal; he was the first of all who play the harp and the flute.
GEN 4:22 Now Zillah also gave birth to Tubal-Cain, who heated metal and shaped all kinds of tools made of bronze and iron. The sister of Tubal-Cain was Naamah.
GEN 4:23 Lamech said to his wives, “Adah and Zillah! Listen to me! You wives of Lamech, hear my words! I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for hurting me.
GEN 4:24 If Cain is to be avenged seven times as much, then Lamech seventy-seven times!”
GEN 4:25 And Adam had marital relations with his wife again, and she gave birth to a son. She named him Seth, saying, “God has given me another child in place of Abel because Cain killed him.”
GEN 4:26 And a son was also born to Seth, whom he named Enosh. At that time people began to worship the Lord.
GEN 5:1 This is the record of the family line of Adam. When God created humankind, he made them in the likeness of God.
GEN 5:2 He created them male and female; when they were created, he blessed them and named them “humankind.”
GEN 5:3 When Adam had lived 130 years he fathered a son in his own likeness, according to his image, and he named him Seth.
GEN 5:4 The length of time Adam lived after he became the father of Seth was 800 years; during this time he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:5 The entire lifetime of Adam was 930 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:6 When Seth had lived 105 years, he became the father of Enosh.
GEN 5:7 Seth lived 807 years after he became the father of Enosh, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:8 The entire lifetime of Seth was 912 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:9 When Enosh had lived 90 years, he became the father of Kenan.
GEN 5:10 Enosh lived 815 years after he became the father of Kenan, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:11 The entire lifetime of Enosh was 905 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:12 When Kenan had lived 70 years, he became the father of Mahalalel.
GEN 5:13 Kenan lived 840 years after he became the father of Mahalalel, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:14 The entire lifetime of Kenan was 910 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:15 When Mahalalel had lived 65 years, he became the father of Jared.
GEN 5:16 Mahalalel lived 830 years after he became the father of Jared, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:17 The entire lifetime of Mahalalel was 895 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:18 When Jared had lived 162 years, he became the father of Enoch.
GEN 5:19 Jared lived 800 years after he became the father of Enoch, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:20 The entire lifetime of Jared was 962 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:21 When Enoch had lived 65 years, he became the father of Methuselah.
GEN 5:22 After he became the father of Methuselah, Enoch walked with God for 300 years, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:23 The entire lifetime of Enoch was 365 years.
GEN 5:24 Enoch walked with God, and then he disappeared because God took him away.
GEN 5:25 When Methuselah had lived 187 years, he became the father of Lamech.
GEN 5:26 Methuselah lived 782 years after he became the father of Lamech, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:27 The entire lifetime of Methuselah was 969 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:28 When Lamech had lived 182 years, he had a son.
GEN 5:29 He named him Noah, saying, “This one will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that the Lord has cursed.”
GEN 5:30 Lamech lived 595 years after he became the father of Noah, and he had other sons and daughters.
GEN 5:31 The entire lifetime of Lamech was 777 years, and then he died.
GEN 5:32 After Noah was 500 years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
GEN 6:1 When humankind began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born to them,
GEN 6:2 the sons of God saw that the daughters of humankind were beautiful. Thus they took wives for themselves from any they chose.
GEN 6:3 So the Lord said, “My spirit will not remain in humankind indefinitely, since they are mortal. They will remain for 120 more years.”
GEN 6:4 The Nephilim were on the earth in those days (and also after this) when the sons of God were having sexual relations with the daughters of humankind, who gave birth to their children. They were the mighty heroes of old, the famous men.
GEN 6:5 But the Lord saw that the wickedness of humankind had become great on the earth. Every inclination of the thoughts of their minds was only evil all the time.
GEN 6:6 The Lord regretted that he had made humankind on the earth, and he was highly offended.
GEN 6:7 So the Lord said, “I will wipe humankind, whom I have created, from the face of the earth – everything from humankind to animals, including creatures that move on the ground and birds of the air, for I regret that I have made them.”
GEN 6:8 But Noah found favor in the sight of the Lord.
GEN 6:9 This is the account of Noah. Noah was a godly man; he was blameless among his contemporaries. He walked with God.
GEN 6:10 Noah had three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
GEN 6:11 The earth was ruined in the sight of God; the earth was filled with violence.
GEN 6:12 God saw the earth, and indeed it was ruined, for all living creatures on the earth were sinful.
GEN 6:13 So God said to Noah, “I have decided that all living creatures must die, for the earth is filled with violence because of them. Now I am about to destroy them and the earth.
GEN 6:14 Make for yourself an ark of cypress wood. Make rooms in the ark, and cover it with pitch inside and out.
GEN 6:15 This is how you should make it: The ark is to be 450 feet long, 75 feet wide, and 45 feet high.
GEN 6:16 Make a roof for the ark and finish it, leaving 18 inches from the top. Put a door in the side of the ark, and make lower, middle, and upper decks.
GEN 6:17 I am about to bring floodwaters on the earth to destroy from under the sky all the living creatures that have the breath of life in them. Everything that is on the earth will die,
GEN 6:18 but I will confirm my covenant with you. You will enter the ark – you, your sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.
GEN 6:19 You must bring into the ark two of every kind of living creature from all flesh, male and female, to keep them alive with you.
GEN 6:20 Of the birds after their kinds, and of the cattle after their kinds, and of every creeping thing of the ground after its kind, two of every kind will come to you so you can keep them alive.
GEN 6:21 And you must take for yourself every kind of food that is eaten, and gather it together. It will be food for you and for them.
GEN 6:22 And Noah did all that God commanded him – he did indeed.
GEN 7:1 The Lord said to Noah, “Come into the ark, you and all your household, for I consider you godly among this generation.
GEN 7:2 You must take with you seven of every kind of clean animal, the male and its mate, two of every kind of unclean animal, the male and its mate,
GEN 7:3 and also seven of every kind of bird in the sky, male and female, to preserve their offspring on the face of the earth.
GEN 7:4 For in seven days I will cause it to rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights, and I will wipe from the face of the ground every living thing that I have made.”
GEN 7:5 And Noah did all that the Lord commanded him.
GEN 7:6 Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters engulfed the earth.
GEN 7:7 Noah entered the ark along with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives because of the floodwaters.
GEN 7:8 Pairs of clean animals, of unclean animals, of birds, and of everything that creeps along the ground,
GEN 7:9 male and female, came into the ark to Noah, just as God had commanded him.
GEN 7:10 And after seven days the floodwaters engulfed the earth.
GEN 7:11 In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month – on that day all the fountains of the great deep burst open and the floodgates of the heavens were opened.
GEN 7:12 And the rain fell on the earth forty days and forty nights.
GEN 7:13 On that very day Noah entered the ark, accompanied by his sons Shem, Ham, and Japheth, along with his wife and his sons’ three wives.
GEN 7:14 They entered, along with every living creature after its kind, every animal after its kind, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth after its kind, and every bird after its kind, everything with wings.
GEN 7:15 Pairs of all creatures that have the breath of life came into the ark to Noah.
GEN 7:16 Those that entered were male and female, just as God commanded him. Then the Lord shut him in.
GEN 7:17 The flood engulfed the earth for forty days. As the waters increased, they lifted the ark and raised it above the earth.
GEN 7:18 The waters completely overwhelmed the earth, and the ark floated on the surface of the waters.
GEN 7:19 The waters completely inundated the earth so that even all the high mountains under the entire sky were covered.
GEN 7:20 The waters rose more than twenty feet above the mountains.
GEN 7:21 And all living things that moved on the earth died, including the birds, domestic animals, wild animals, all the creatures that swarm over the earth, and all humankind.
GEN 7:22 Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
GEN 7:23 So the Lord destroyed every living thing that was on the surface of the ground, including people, animals, creatures that creep along the ground, and birds of the sky. They were wiped off the earth. Only Noah and those who were with him in the ark survived.
GEN 7:24 The waters prevailed over the earth for 150 days.
GEN 8:1 But God remembered Noah and all the wild animals and domestic animals that were with him in the ark. God caused a wind to blow over the earth and the waters receded.
GEN 8:2 The fountains of the deep and the floodgates of heaven were closed, and the rain stopped falling from the sky.
GEN 8:3 The waters kept receding steadily from the earth, so that they had gone down by the end of the 150 days.
GEN 8:4 On the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the ark came to rest on one of the mountains of Ararat.
GEN 8:5 The waters kept on receding until the tenth month. On the first day of the tenth month, the tops of the mountains became visible.
GEN 8:6 At the end of forty days, Noah opened the window he had made in the ark
GEN 8:7 and sent out a raven; it kept flying back and forth until the waters had dried up on the earth.
GEN 8:8 Then Noah sent out a dove to see if the waters had receded from the surface of the ground.
GEN 8:9 The dove could not find a resting place for its feet because water still covered the surface of the entire earth, and so it returned to Noah in the ark. He stretched out his hand, took the dove, and brought it back into the ark.
GEN 8:10 He waited seven more days and then sent out the dove again from the ark.
GEN 8:11 When the dove returned to him in the evening, there was a freshly plucked olive leaf in its beak! Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth.
GEN 8:12 He waited another seven days and sent the dove out again, but it did not return to him this time.
GEN 8:13 In Noah’s six hundred and first year, in the first day of the first month, the waters had dried up from the earth, and Noah removed the covering from the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was dry.
GEN 8:14 And by the twenty-seventh day of the second month the earth was dry.
GEN 8:15 Then God spoke to Noah and said,
GEN 8:16 “Come out of the ark, you, your wife, your sons, and your sons’ wives with you.
GEN 8:17 Bring out with you all the living creatures that are with you. Bring out every living thing, including the birds, animals, and every creeping thing that creeps on the earth. Let them increase and be fruitful and multiply on the earth!”
GEN 8:18 Noah went out along with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives.
GEN 8:19 Every living creature, every creeping thing, every bird, and everything that moves on the earth went out of the ark in their groups.
GEN 8:20 Noah built an altar to the Lord. He then took some of every kind of clean animal and clean bird and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
GEN 8:21 And the Lord smelled the soothing aroma and said to himself, “I will never again curse the ground because of humankind, even though the inclination of their minds is evil from childhood on. I will never again destroy everything that lives, as I have just done.
GEN 8:22 “While the earth continues to exist, planting time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night will not cease.”
GEN 9:1 Then God blessed Noah and his sons and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth.
GEN 9:2 Every living creature of the earth and every bird of the sky will be terrified of you. Everything that creeps on the ground and all the fish of the sea are under your authority.
GEN 9:3 You may eat any moving thing that lives. As I gave you the green plants, I now give you everything.
GEN 9:4 But you must not eat meat with its life (that is, its blood) in it.
GEN 9:5 For your lifeblood I will surely exact punishment, from every living creature I will exact punishment. From each person I will exact punishment for the life of the individual since the man was his relative.
GEN 9:6 “Whoever sheds human blood, by other humans must his blood be shed; for in God’s image God has made humankind.”
GEN 9:7 But as for you, be fruitful and multiply; increase abundantly on the earth and multiply on it.”
GEN 9:8 God said to Noah and his sons,
GEN 9:9 “Look! I now confirm my covenant with you and your descendants after you
GEN 9:10 and with every living creature that is with you, including the birds, the domestic animals, and every living creature of the earth with you, all those that came out of the ark with you – every living creature of the earth.
GEN 9:11 I confirm my covenant with you: Never again will all living things be wiped out by the waters of a flood; never again will a flood destroy the earth.”
GEN 9:12 And God said, “This is the guarantee of the covenant I am making with you and every living creature with you, a covenant for all subsequent generations:
GEN 9:13 I will place my rainbow in the clouds, and it will become a guarantee of the covenant between me and the earth.
GEN 9:14 Whenever I bring clouds over the earth and the rainbow appears in the clouds,
GEN 9:15 then I will remember my covenant with you and with all living creatures of all kinds. Never again will the waters become a flood and destroy all living things.
GEN 9:16 When the rainbow is in the clouds, I will notice it and remember the perpetual covenant between God and all living creatures of all kinds that are on the earth.”
GEN 9:17 So God said to Noah, “This is the guarantee of the covenant that I am confirming between me and all living things that are on the earth.”
GEN 9:18 The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Japheth. (Now Ham was the father of Canaan.)
GEN 9:19 These were the sons of Noah, and from them the whole earth was populated.
GEN 9:20 Noah, a man of the soil, began to plant a vineyard.
GEN 9:21 When he drank some of the wine, he got drunk and uncovered himself inside his tent.
GEN 9:22 Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his father’s nakedness and told his two brothers who were outside.
GEN 9:23 Shem and Japheth took the garment and placed it on their shoulders. Then they walked in backwards and covered up their father’s nakedness. Their faces were turned the other way so they did not see their father’s nakedness.
GEN 9:24 When Noah awoke from his drunken stupor he learned what his youngest son had done to him.
GEN 9:25 So he said, “Cursed be Canaan! The lowest of slaves he will be to his brothers.”
GEN 9:26 He also said, “Worthy of praise is the Lord, the God of Shem! May Canaan be the slave of Shem!
GEN 9:27 May God enlarge Japheth’s territory and numbers! May he live in the tents of Shem and may Canaan be his slave!”
GEN 9:28 After the flood Noah lived 350 years.
GEN 9:29 The entire lifetime of Noah was 950 years, and then he died.
GEN 10:1 This is the account of Noah’s sons Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Sons were born to them after the flood.
GEN 10:2 The sons of Japheth were Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.
GEN 10:3 The sons of Gomer were Askenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
GEN 10:4 The sons of Javan were Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittim, and the Dodanim.
GEN 10:5 From these the coastlands of the nations were separated into their lands, every one according to its language, according to their families, by their nations.
GEN 10:6 The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
GEN 10:7 The sons of Cush were Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan.
GEN 10:8 Cush was the father of Nimrod; he began to be a valiant warrior on the earth.
GEN 10:9 He was a mighty hunter before the Lord. (That is why it is said, “Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the Lord.”)
GEN 10:10 The primary regions of his kingdom were Babel, Erech, Akkad, and Calneh in the land of Shinar.
GEN 10:11 From that land he went to Assyria, where he built Nineveh, Rehoboth-Ir, Calah,
GEN 10:12 and Resen, which is between Nineveh and the great city Calah.
GEN 10:13 Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites,
GEN 10:14 Pathrusites, Casluhites (from whom the Philistines came), and Caphtorites.
GEN 10:15 Canaan was the father of Sidon his firstborn, Heth,
GEN 10:16 the Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites,
GEN 10:17 Hivites, Arkites, Sinites,
GEN 10:18 Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hamathites. Eventually the families of the Canaanites were scattered
GEN 10:19 and the borders of Canaan extended from Sidon all the way to Gerar as far as Gaza, and all the way to Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha.
GEN 10:20 These are the sons of Ham, according to their families, according to their languages, by their lands, and by their nations.
GEN 10:21 And sons were also born to Shem (the older brother of Japheth), the father of all the sons of Eber.
GEN 10:22 The sons of Shem were Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram.
GEN 10:23 The sons of Aram were Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash.
GEN 10:24 Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber.
GEN 10:25 Two sons were born to Eber: One was named Peleg because in his days the earth was divided, and his brother’s name was Joktan.
GEN 10:26 Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
GEN 10:27 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
GEN 10:28 Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
GEN 10:29 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were sons of Joktan.
GEN 10:30 Their dwelling place was from Mesha all the way to Sephar in the eastern hills.
GEN 10:31 These are the sons of Shem according to their families, according to their languages, by their lands, and according to their nations.
GEN 10:32 These are the families of the sons of Noah, according to their genealogies, by their nations, and from these the nations spread over the earth after the flood.
GEN 11:1 The whole earth had a common language and a common vocabulary.
GEN 11:2 When the people moved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there.
GEN 11:3 Then they said to one another, “Come, let’s make bricks and bake them thoroughly.” (They had brick instead of stone and tar instead of mortar.)
GEN 11:4 Then they said, “Come, let’s build ourselves a city and a tower with its top in the heavens so that we may make a name for ourselves. Otherwise we will be scattered across the face of the entire earth.”
GEN 11:5 But the Lord came down to see the city and the tower that the people had started building.
GEN 11:6 And the Lord said, “If as one people all sharing a common language they have begun to do this, then nothing they plan to do will be beyond them.
GEN 11:7 Come, let’s go down and confuse their language so they won’t be able to understand each other.”
GEN 11:8 So the Lord scattered them from there across the face of the entire earth, and they stopped building the city.
GEN 11:9 That is why its name was called Babel – because there the Lord confused the language of the entire world, and from there the Lord scattered them across the face of the entire earth.
GEN 11:10 This is the account of Shem. Shem was 100 old when he became the father of Arphaxad, two years after the flood.
GEN 11:11 And after becoming the father of Arphaxad, Shem lived 500 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:12 When Arphaxad had lived 35 years, he became the father of Shelah.
GEN 11:13 And after he became the father of Shelah, Arphaxad lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:14 When Shelah had lived 30 years, he became the father of Eber.
GEN 11:15 And after he became the father of Eber, Shelah lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:16 When Eber had lived 34 years, he became the father of Peleg.
GEN 11:17 And after he became the father of Peleg, Eber lived 430 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:18 When Peleg had lived 30 years, he became the father of Reu.
GEN 11:19 And after he became the father of Reu, Peleg lived 209 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:20 When Reu had lived 32 years, he became the father of Serug.
GEN 11:21 And after he became the father of Serug, Reu lived 207 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:22 When Serug had lived 30 years, he became the father of Nahor.
GEN 11:23 And after he became the father of Nahor, Serug lived 200 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:24 When Nahor had lived 29 years, he became the father of Terah.
GEN 11:25 And after he became the father of Terah, Nahor lived 119 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN 11:26 When Terah had lived 70 years, he became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
GEN 11:27 This is the account of Terah. Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran. And Haran became the father of Lot.
GEN 11:28 Haran died in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldeans, while his father Terah was still alive.
GEN 11:29 And Abram and Nahor took wives for themselves. The name of Abram’s wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor’s wife was Milcah; she was the daughter of Haran, the father of both Milcah and Iscah.
GEN 11:30 But Sarai was barren; she had no children.
GEN 11:31 Terah took his son Abram, his grandson Lot (the son of Haran), and his daughter-in-law Sarai, his son Abram’s wife, and with them he set out from Ur of the Chaldeans to go to Canaan. When they came to Haran, they settled there.
GEN 11:32 The lifetime of Terah was 205 years, and he died in Haran.
GEN 12:1 Now the Lord said to Abram, “Go out from your country, your relatives, and your father’s household to the land that I will show you.
GEN 12:2 Then I will make you into a great nation, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great, so that you will exemplify divine blessing.
GEN 12:3 I will bless those who bless you, but the one who treats you lightly I must curse, and all the families of the earth will bless one another by your name.”
GEN 12:4 So Abram left, just as the Lord had told him to do, and Lot went with him. (Now Abram was 75 years old when he departed from Haran.)
GEN 12:5 And Abram took his wife Sarai, his nephew Lot, and all the possessions they had accumulated and the people they had acquired in Haran, and they left for the land of Canaan. They entered the land of Canaan.
GEN 12:6 Abram traveled through the land as far as the oak tree of Moreh at Shechem. (At that time the Canaanites were in the land.)
GEN 12:7 The Lord appeared to Abram and said, “To your descendants I will give this land.” So Abram built an altar there to the Lord, who had appeared to him.
GEN 12:8 Then he moved from there to the hill country east of Bethel and pitched his tent, with Bethel on the west and Ai on the east. There he built an altar to the Lord and worshiped the Lord.
GEN 12:9 Abram continually journeyed by stages down to the Negev.
GEN 12:10 There was a famine in the land, so Abram went down to Egypt to stay for a while because the famine was severe.
GEN 12:11 As he approached Egypt, he said to his wife Sarai, “Look, I know that you are a beautiful woman.
GEN 12:12 When the Egyptians see you they will say, ‘This is his wife.’ Then they will kill me but will keep you alive.
GEN 12:13 So tell them you are my sister so that it may go well for me because of you and my life will be spared on account of you.”
GEN 12:14 When Abram entered Egypt, the Egyptians saw that the woman was very beautiful.
GEN 12:15 When Pharaoh’s officials saw her, they praised her to Pharaoh. So Abram’s wife was taken into the household of Pharaoh,
GEN 12:16 and he did treat Abram well on account of her. Abram received sheep and cattle, male donkeys, male servants, female servants, female donkeys, and camels.
GEN 12:17 But the Lord struck Pharaoh and his household with severe diseases because of Sarai, Abram’s wife.
GEN 12:18 So Pharaoh summoned Abram and said, “What is this you have done to me? Why didn’t you tell me that she was your wife?
GEN 12:19 Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I took her to be my wife? Here is your wife! Take her and go!”
GEN 12:20 Pharaoh gave his men orders about Abram, and so they expelled him, along with his wife and all his possessions.
GEN 13:1 So Abram went up from Egypt into the Negev. He took his wife and all his possessions with him, as well as Lot.
GEN 13:2 (Now Abram was very wealthy in livestock, silver, and gold.)
GEN 13:3 And he journeyed from place to place from the Negev as far as Bethel. He returned to the place where he had pitched his tent at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai.
GEN 13:4 This was the place where he had first built the altar, and there Abram worshiped the Lord.
GEN 13:5 Now Lot, who was traveling with Abram, also had flocks, herds, and tents.
GEN 13:6 But the land could not support them while they were living side by side. Because their possessions were so great, they were not able to live alongside one another.
GEN 13:7 So there were quarrels between Abram’s herdsmen and Lot’s herdsmen. (Now the Canaanites and the Perizzites were living in the land at that time.)
GEN 13:8 Abram said to Lot, “Let there be no quarreling between me and you, and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are close relatives.
GEN 13:9 Is not the whole land before you? Separate yourself now from me. If you go to the left, then I’ll go to the right, but if you go to the right, then I’ll go to the left.”
GEN 13:10 Lot looked up and saw the whole region of the Jordan. He noticed that all of it was well-watered (before the Lord obliterated Sodom and Gomorrah) like the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, all the way to Zoar.
GEN 13:11 Lot chose for himself the whole region of the Jordan and traveled toward the east. So the relatives separated from each other.
GEN 13:12 Abram settled in the land of Canaan, but Lot settled among the cities of the Jordan plain and pitched his tents next to Sodom.
GEN 13:13 (Now the people of Sodom were extremely wicked rebels against the Lord.)
GEN 13:14 After Lot had departed, the Lord said to Abram, “Look from the place where you stand to the north, south, east, and west.
GEN 13:15 I will give all the land that you see to you and your descendants forever.
GEN 13:16 And I will make your descendants like the dust of the earth, so that if anyone is able to count the dust of the earth, then your descendants also can be counted.
GEN 13:17 Get up and walk throughout the land, for I will give it to you.”
GEN 13:18 So Abram moved his tents and went to live by the oaks of Mamre in Hebron, and he built an altar to the Lord there.
GEN 14:1 At that time Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Kedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations
GEN 14:2 went to war against Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar).
GEN 14:3 These last five kings joined forces in the Valley of Siddim (that is, the Salt Sea).
GEN 14:4 For twelve years they had served Kedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
GEN 14:5 In the fourteenth year, Kedorlaomer and the kings who were his allies came and defeated the Rephaites in Ashteroth Karnaim, the Zuzites in Ham, the Emites in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
GEN 14:6 and the Horites in their hill country of Seir, as far as El Paran, which is near the desert.
GEN 14:7 Then they attacked En Mishpat (that is, Kadesh) again, and they conquered all the territory of the Amalekites, as well as the Amorites who were living in Hazazon Tamar.
GEN 14:8 Then the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar) went out and prepared for battle. In the Valley of Siddim they met
GEN 14:9 Kedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of nations, Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar. Four kings fought against five.
GEN 14:10 Now the Valley of Siddim was full of tar pits. When the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, they fell into them, but some survivors fled to the hills.
GEN 14:11 The four victorious kings took all the possessions and food of Sodom and Gomorrah and left.
GEN 14:12 They also took Abram’s nephew Lot and his possessions when they left, for Lot was living in Sodom.
GEN 14:13 A fugitive came and told Abram the Hebrew. Now Abram was living by the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, the brother of Eshcol and Aner. (All these were allied by treaty with Abram.)
GEN 14:14 When Abram heard that his nephew had been taken captive, he mobilized his 318 trained men who had been born in his household, and he pursued the invaders as far as Dan.
GEN 14:15 Then, during the night, Abram divided his forces against them and defeated them. He chased them as far as Hobah, which is north of Damascus.
GEN 14:16 He retrieved all the stolen property. He also brought back his nephew Lot and his possessions, as well as the women and the rest of the people.
GEN 14:17 After Abram returned from defeating Kedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet Abram in the Valley of Shaveh (known as the King’s Valley).
GEN 14:18 Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine. (Now he was the priest of the Most High God.)
GEN 14:19 He blessed Abram, saying, “Blessed be Abram by the Most High God, Creator of heaven and earth.
GEN 14:20 Worthy of praise is the Most High God, who delivered your enemies into your hand.” Abram gave Melchizedek a tenth of everything.
GEN 14:21 Then the king of Sodom said to Abram, “Give me the people and take the possessions for yourself.”
GEN 14:22 But Abram replied to the king of Sodom, “I raise my hand to the Lord, the Most High God, Creator of heaven and earth, and vow
GEN 14:23 that I will take nothing belonging to you, not even a thread or the strap of a sandal. That way you can never say, ‘It is I who made Abram rich.’
GEN 14:24 I will take nothing except compensation for what the young men have eaten. As for the share of the men who went with me – Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre – let them take their share.”
GEN 15:1 After these things the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision: “Fear not, Abram! I am your shield and the one who will reward you in great abundance.”
GEN 15:2 But Abram said, “O sovereign Lord, what will you give me since I continue to be childless, and my heir is Eliezer of Damascus?”
GEN 15:3 Abram added, “Since you have not given me a descendant, then look, one born in my house will be my heir!”
GEN 15:4 But look, the word of the Lord came to him: “This man will not be your heir, but instead a son who comes from your own body will be your heir.”
GEN 15:5 The Lord took him outside and said, “Gaze into the sky and count the stars – if you are able to count them!” Then he said to him, “So will your descendants be.”
GEN 15:6 Abram believed the Lord, and the Lord considered his response of faith as proof of genuine loyalty.
GEN 15:7 The Lord said to him, “I am the Lord who brought you out from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to possess.”
GEN 15:8 But Abram said, “O sovereign Lord, by what can I know that I am to possess it?”
GEN 15:9 The Lord said to him, “Take for me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon.”
GEN 15:10 So Abram took all these for him and then cut them in two and placed each half opposite the other, but he did not cut the birds in half.
GEN 15:11 When birds of prey came down on the carcasses, Abram drove them away.
GEN 15:12 When the sun went down, Abram fell sound asleep, and great terror overwhelmed him.
GEN 15:13 Then the Lord said to Abram, “Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a foreign country. They will be enslaved and oppressed for four hundred years.
GEN 15:14 But I will execute judgment on the nation that they will serve. Afterward they will come out with many possessions.
GEN 15:15 But as for you, you will go to your ancestors in peace and be buried at a good old age.
GEN 15:16 In the fourth generation your descendants will return here, for the sin of the Amorites has not yet reached its limit.”
GEN 15:17 When the sun had gone down and it was dark, a smoking firepot with a flaming torch passed between the animal parts.
GEN 15:18 That day the Lord made a covenant with Abram: “To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates River –
GEN 15:19 the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites,
GEN 15:20 Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites,
GEN 15:21 Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites.”
GEN 16:1 Now Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not given birth to any children, but she had an Egyptian servant named Hagar.
GEN 16:2 So Sarai said to Abram, “Since the Lord has prevented me from having children, have sexual relations with my servant. Perhaps I can have a family by her.” Abram did what Sarai told him.
GEN 16:3 So after Abram had lived in Canaan for ten years, Sarai, Abram’s wife, gave Hagar, her Egyptian servant, to her husband to be his wife.
GEN 16:4 He had sexual relations with Hagar, and she became pregnant. Once Hagar realized she was pregnant, she despised Sarai.
GEN 16:5 Then Sarai said to Abram, “You have brought this wrong on me! I allowed my servant to have sexual relations with you, but when she realized that she was pregnant, she despised me. May the Lord judge between you and me!”
GEN 16:6 Abram said to Sarai, “Since your servant is under your authority, do to her whatever you think best.” Then Sarai treated Hagar harshly, so she ran away from Sarai.
GEN 16:7 The Lord’s angel found Hagar near a spring of water in the desert – the spring that is along the road to Shur.
GEN 16:8 He said, “Hagar, servant of Sarai, where have you come from, and where are you going?” She replied, “I’m running away from my mistress, Sarai.”
GEN 16:9 Then the Lord’s angel said to her, “Return to your mistress and submit to her authority.
GEN 16:10 I will greatly multiply your descendants,” the Lord’s angel added, “so that they will be too numerous to count.”
GEN 16:11 Then the Lord’s angel said to her, “You are now pregnant and are about to give birth to a son. You are to name him Ishmael, for the Lord has heard your painful groans.
GEN 16:12 He will be a wild donkey of a man. He will be hostile to everyone, and everyone will be hostile to him. He will live away from his brothers.”
GEN 16:13 So Hagar named the Lord who spoke to her, “You are the God who sees me,” for she said, “Here I have seen one who sees me!”
GEN 16:14 That is why the well was called Beer Lahai Roi. (It is located between Kadesh and Bered.)
GEN 16:15 So Hagar gave birth to Abram’s son, whom Abram named Ishmael.
GEN 16:16 (Now Abram was 86 years old when Hagar gave birth to Ishmael.)
GEN 17:1 When Abram was 99 years old, the Lord appeared to him and said, “I am the sovereign God. Walk before me and be blameless.
GEN 17:2 Then I will confirm my covenant between me and you, and I will give you a multitude of descendants.”
GEN 17:3 Abram bowed down with his face to the ground, and God said to him,
GEN 17:4 “As for me, this is my covenant with you: You will be the father of a multitude of nations.
GEN 17:5 No longer will your name be Abram. Instead, your name will be Abraham because I will make you the father of a multitude of nations.
GEN 17:6 I will make you extremely fruitful. I will make nations of you, and kings will descend from you.
GEN 17:7 I will confirm my covenant as a perpetual covenant between me and you. It will extend to your descendants after you throughout their generations. I will be your God and the God of your descendants after you.
GEN 17:8 I will give the whole land of Canaan – the land where you are now residing – to you and your descendants after you as a permanent possession. I will be their God.”
GEN 17:9 Then God said to Abraham, “As for you, you must keep the covenantal requirement I am imposing on you and your descendants after you throughout their generations.
GEN 17:10 This is my requirement that you and your descendants after you must keep: Every male among you must be circumcised.
GEN 17:11 You must circumcise the flesh of your foreskins. This will be a reminder of the covenant between me and you.
GEN 17:12 Throughout your generations every male among you who is eight days old must be circumcised, whether born in your house or bought with money from any foreigner who is not one of your descendants.
GEN 17:13 They must indeed be circumcised, whether born in your house or bought with money. The sign of my covenant will be visible in your flesh as a permanent reminder.
GEN 17:14 Any uncircumcised male who has not been circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin will be cut off from his people – he has failed to carry out my requirement.”
GEN 17:15 Then God said to Abraham, “As for your wife, you must no longer call her Sarai; Sarah will be her name.
GEN 17:16 I will bless her and will give you a son through her. I will bless her and she will become a mother of nations. Kings of countries will come from her!”
GEN 17:17 Then Abraham bowed down with his face to the ground and laughed as he said to himself, “Can a son be born to a man who is a hundred years old? Can Sarah bear a child at the age of ninety?”
GEN 17:18 Abraham said to God, “O that Ishmael might live before you!”
GEN 17:19 God said, “No, Sarah your wife is going to bear you a son, and you will name him Isaac. I will confirm my covenant with him as a perpetual covenant for his descendants after him.
GEN 17:20 As for Ishmael, I have heard you. I will indeed bless him, make him fruitful, and give him a multitude of descendants. He will become the father of twelve princes; I will make him into a great nation.
GEN 17:21 But I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this set time next year.”
GEN 17:22 When he finished speaking with Abraham, God went up from him.
GEN 17:23 Abraham took his son Ishmael and every male in his household (whether born in his house or bought with money) and circumcised them on that very same day, just as God had told him to do.
GEN 17:24 Now Abraham was 99 years old when he was circumcised;
GEN 17:25 his son Ishmael was thirteen years old when he was circumcised.
GEN 17:26 Abraham and his son Ishmael were circumcised on the very same day.
GEN 17:27 All the men of his household, whether born in his household or bought with money from a foreigner, were circumcised with him.
GEN 18:1 The Lord appeared to Abraham by the oaks of Mamre while he was sitting at the entrance to his tent during the hottest time of the day.
GEN 18:2 Abraham looked up and saw three men standing across from him. When he saw them he ran from the entrance of the tent to meet them and bowed low to the ground.
GEN 18:3 He said, “My lord, if I have found favor in your sight, do not pass by and leave your servant.
GEN 18:4 Let a little water be brought so that you may all wash your feet and rest under the tree.
GEN 18:5 And let me get a bit of food so that you may refresh yourselves since you have passed by your servant’s home. After that you may be on your way.” “All right,” they replied, “you may do as you say.”
GEN 18:6 So Abraham hurried into the tent and said to Sarah, “Quick! Take three measures of fine flour, knead it, and make bread.”
GEN 18:7 Then Abraham ran to the herd and chose a fine, tender calf, and gave it to a servant, who quickly prepared it.
GEN 18:8 Abraham then took some curds and milk, along with the calf that had been prepared, and placed the food before them. They ate while he was standing near them under a tree.
GEN 18:9 Then they asked him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” He replied, “There, in the tent.”
GEN 18:10 One of them said, “I will surely return to you when the season comes round again, and your wife Sarah will have a son!” (Now Sarah was listening at the entrance to the tent, not far behind him.
GEN 18:11 Abraham and Sarah were old and advancing in years; Sarah had long since passed menopause.)
GEN 18:12 So Sarah laughed to herself, thinking, “After I am worn out will I have pleasure, especially when my husband is old too?”
GEN 18:13 The Lord said to Abraham, “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Will I really have a child when I am old?’
GEN 18:14 Is anything impossible for the Lord? I will return to you when the season comes round again and Sarah will have a son.”
GEN 18:15 Then Sarah lied, saying, “I did not laugh,” because she was afraid. But the Lord said, “No! You did laugh.”
GEN 18:16 When the men got up to leave, they looked out over Sodom. (Now Abraham was walking with them to see them on their way.)
GEN 18:17 Then the Lord said, “Should I hide from Abraham what I am about to do?
GEN 18:18 After all, Abraham will surely become a great and powerful nation, and all the nations on the earth will pronounce blessings on one another using his name.
GEN 18:19 I have chosen him so that he may command his children and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord by doing what is right and just. Then the Lord will give to Abraham what he promised him.”
GEN 18:20 So the Lord said, “The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is so great and their sin so blatant
GEN 18:21 that I must go down and see if they are as wicked as the outcry suggests. If not, I want to know.”
GEN 18:22 The two men turned and headed toward Sodom, but Abraham was still standing before the Lord.
GEN 18:23 Abraham approached and said, “Will you sweep away the godly along with the wicked?
GEN 18:24 What if there are fifty godly people in the city? Will you really wipe it out and not spare the place for the sake of the fifty godly people who are in it?
GEN 18:25 Far be it from you to do such a thing – to kill the godly with the wicked, treating the godly and the wicked alike! Far be it from you! Will not the judge of the whole earth do what is right?”
GEN 18:26 So the Lord replied, “If I find in the city of Sodom fifty godly people, I will spare the whole place for their sake.”
GEN 18:27 Then Abraham asked, “Since I have undertaken to speak to the Lord (although I am but dust and ashes),
GEN 18:28 what if there are five less than the fifty godly people? Will you destroy the whole city because five are lacking?” He replied, “I will not destroy it if I find forty-five there.”
GEN 18:29 Abraham spoke to him again, “What if forty are found there?” He replied, “I will not do it for the sake of the forty.”
GEN 18:30 Then Abraham said, “May the Lord not be angry so that I may speak! What if thirty are found there?” He replied, “I will not do it if I find thirty there.”
GEN 18:31 Abraham said, “Since I have undertaken to speak to the Lord, what if only twenty are found there?” He replied, “I will not destroy it for the sake of the twenty.”
GEN 18:32 Finally Abraham said, “May the Lord not be angry so that I may speak just once more. What if ten are found there?” He replied, “I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.”
GEN 18:33 The Lord went on his way when he had finished speaking to Abraham. Then Abraham returned home.
GEN 19:1 The two angels came to Sodom in the evening while Lot was sitting in the city’s gateway. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face toward the ground.
GEN 19:2 He said, “Here, my lords, please turn aside to your servant’s house. Stay the night and wash your feet. Then you can be on your way early in the morning.” “No,” they replied, “we’ll spend the night in the town square.”
GEN 19:3 But he urged them persistently, so they turned aside with him and entered his house. He prepared a feast for them, including bread baked without yeast, and they ate.
GEN 19:4 Before they could lie down to sleep, all the men – both young and old, from every part of the city of Sodom – surrounded the house.
GEN 19:5 They shouted to Lot, “Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to us so we can have sex with them!”
GEN 19:6 Lot went outside to them, shutting the door behind him.
GEN 19:7 He said, “No, my brothers! Don’t act so wickedly!
GEN 19:8 Look, I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with a man. Let me bring them out to you, and you can do to them whatever you please. Only don’t do anything to these men, for they have come under the protection of my roof.”
GEN 19:9 “Out of our way!” they cried, and “This man came to live here as a foreigner, and now he dares to judge us! We’ll do more harm to you than to them!” They kept pressing in on Lot until they were close enough to break down the door.
GEN 19:10 So the men inside reached out and pulled Lot back into the house as they shut the door.
GEN 19:11 Then they struck the men who were at the door of the house, from the youngest to the oldest, with blindness. The men outside wore themselves out trying to find the door.
GEN 19:12 Then the two visitors said to Lot, “Who else do you have here? Do you have any sons-in-law, sons, daughters, or other relatives in the city? Get them out of this place
GEN 19:13 because we are about to destroy it. The outcry against this place is so great before the Lord that he has sent us to destroy it.”
GEN 19:14 Then Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law who were going to marry his daughters. He said, “Quick, get out of this place because the Lord is about to destroy the city!” But his sons-in-law thought he was ridiculing them.
GEN 19:15 At dawn the angels hurried Lot along, saying, “Get going! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here, or else you will be destroyed when the city is judged!”
GEN 19:16 When Lot hesitated, the men grabbed his hand and the hands of his wife and two daughters because the Lord had compassion on them. They led them away and placed them outside the city.
GEN 19:17 When they had brought them outside, they said, “Run for your lives! Don’t look behind you or stop anywhere in the valley! Escape to the mountains or you will be destroyed!”
GEN 19:18 But Lot said to them, “No, please, Lord!
GEN 19:19 Your servant has found favor with you, and you have shown me great kindness by sparing my life. But I am not able to escape to the mountains because this disaster will overtake me and I’ll die.
GEN 19:20 Look, this town over here is close enough to escape to, and it’s just a little one. Let me go there. It’s just a little place, isn’t it? Then I’ll survive.”
GEN 19:21 “Very well,” he replied, “I will grant this request too and will not overthrow the town you mentioned.
GEN 19:22 Run there quickly, for I cannot do anything until you arrive there.” (This incident explains why the town was called Zoar.)
GEN 19:23 The sun had just risen over the land as Lot reached Zoar.
GEN 19:24 Then the Lord rained down sulfur and fire on Sodom and Gomorrah. It was sent down from the sky by the Lord.
GEN 19:25 So he overthrew those cities and all that region, including all the inhabitants of the cities and the vegetation that grew from the ground.
GEN 19:26 But Lot’s wife looked back longingly and was turned into a pillar of salt.
GEN 19:27 Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before the Lord.
GEN 19:28 He looked out toward Sodom and Gomorrah and all the land of that region. As he did so, he saw the smoke rising up from the land like smoke from a furnace.
GEN 19:29 So when God destroyed the cities of the region, God honored Abraham’s request. He removed Lot from the midst of the destruction when he destroyed the cities Lot had lived in.
GEN 19:30 Lot went up from Zoar with his two daughters and settled in the mountains because he was afraid to live in Zoar. So he lived in a cave with his two daughters.
GEN 19:31 Later the older daughter said to the younger, “Our father is old, and there is no man anywhere nearby to have sexual relations with us, according to the way of all the world.
GEN 19:32 Come, let’s make our father drunk with wine so we can have sexual relations with him and preserve our family line through our father.”
GEN 19:33 So that night they made their father drunk with wine, and the older daughter came and had sexual relations with her father. But he was not aware that she had sexual relations with him and then got up.
GEN 19:34 So in the morning the older daughter said to the younger, “Since I had sexual relations with my father last night, let’s make him drunk again tonight. Then you go and have sexual relations with him so we can preserve our family line through our father.”
GEN 19:35 So they made their father drunk that night as well, and the younger one came and had sexual relations with him. But he was not aware that she had sexual relations with him and then got up.
GEN 19:36 In this way both of Lot’s daughters became pregnant by their father.
GEN 19:37 The older daughter gave birth to a son and named him Moab. He is the ancestor of the Moabites of today.
GEN 19:38 The younger daughter also gave birth to a son and named him Ben-Ammi. He is the ancestor of the Ammonites of today.
GEN 20:1 Abraham journeyed from there to the Negev region and settled between Kadesh and Shur. While he lived as a temporary resident in Gerar,
GEN 20:2 Abraham said about his wife Sarah, “She is my sister.” So Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent for Sarah and took her.
GEN 20:3 But God appeared to Abimelech in a dream at night and said to him, “You are as good as dead because of the woman you have taken, for she is someone else’s wife.”
GEN 20:4 Now Abimelech had not gone near her. He said, “Lord, would you really slaughter an innocent nation?
GEN 20:5 Did Abraham not say to me, ‘She is my sister’? And she herself said, ‘He is my brother.’ I have done this with a clear conscience and with innocent hands!”
GEN 20:6 Then in the dream God replied to him, “Yes, I know that you have done this with a clear conscience. That is why I have kept you from sinning against me and why I did not allow you to touch her.
GEN 20:7 But now give back the man’s wife. Indeed he is a prophet and he will pray for you; thus you will live. But if you don’t give her back, know that you will surely die along with all who belong to you.”
GEN 20:8 Early in the morning Abimelech summoned all his servants. When he told them about all these things, they were terrified.
GEN 20:9 Abimelech summoned Abraham and said to him, “What have you done to us? What sin did I commit against you that would cause you to bring such great guilt on me and my kingdom? You have done things to me that should not be done!”
GEN 20:10 Then Abimelech asked Abraham, “What prompted you to do this thing?”
GEN 20:11 Abraham replied, “Because I thought, ‘Surely no one fears God in this place. They will kill me because of my wife.’
GEN 20:12 What’s more, she is indeed my sister, my father’s daughter, but not my mother’s daughter. She became my wife.
GEN 20:13 When God made me wander from my father’s house, I told her, ‘This is what you can do to show your loyalty to me: Every place we go, say about me, “He is my brother.”’”
GEN 20:14 So Abimelech gave sheep, cattle, and male and female servants to Abraham. He also gave his wife Sarah back to him.
GEN 20:15 Then Abimelech said, “Look, my land is before you; live wherever you please.”
GEN 20:16 To Sarah he said, “Look, I have given a thousand pieces of silver to your ‘brother.’ This is compensation for you so that you will stand vindicated before all who are with you.”
GEN 20:17 Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech, as well as his wife and female slaves so that they were able to have children.
GEN 20:18 For the Lord had caused infertility to strike every woman in the household of Abimelech because he took Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
GEN 21:1 The Lord visited Sarah just as he had said he would and did for Sarah what he had promised.
GEN 21:2 So Sarah became pregnant and bore Abraham a son in his old age at the appointed time that God had told him.
GEN 21:3 Abraham named his son – whom Sarah bore to him – Isaac.
GEN 21:4 When his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham circumcised him just as God had commanded him to do.
GEN 21:5 (Now Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him.)
GEN 21:6 Sarah said, “God has made me laugh. Everyone who hears about this will laugh with me.”
GEN 21:7 She went on to say, “Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet I have given birth to a son for him in his old age!”
GEN 21:8 The child grew and was weaned. Abraham prepared a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.
GEN 21:9 But Sarah noticed the son of Hagar the Egyptian – the son whom Hagar had borne to Abraham – mocking.
GEN 21:10 So she said to Abraham, “Banish that slave woman and her son, for the son of that slave woman will not be an heir along with my son Isaac!”
GEN 21:11 Sarah’s demand displeased Abraham greatly because Ishmael was his son.
GEN 21:12 But God said to Abraham, “Do not be upset about the boy or your slave wife. Do all that Sarah is telling you because through Isaac your descendants will be counted.
GEN 21:13 But I will also make the son of the slave wife into a great nation, for he is your descendant too.”
GEN 21:14 Early in the morning Abraham took some food and a skin of water and gave them to Hagar. He put them on her shoulders, gave her the child, and sent her away. So she went wandering aimlessly through the wilderness of Beer Sheba.
GEN 21:15 When the water in the skin was gone, she shoved the child under one of the shrubs.
GEN 21:16 Then she went and sat down by herself across from him at quite a distance, about a bowshot away; for she thought, “I refuse to watch the child die.” So she sat across from him and wept uncontrollably.
GEN 21:17 But God heard the boy’s voice. The angel of God called to Hagar from heaven and asked her, “What is the matter, Hagar? Don’t be afraid, for God has heard the boy’s voice right where he is crying.
GEN 21:18 Get up! Help the boy up and hold him by the hand, for I will make him into a great nation.”
GEN 21:19 Then God enabled Hagar to see a well of water. She went over and filled the skin with water, and then gave the boy a drink.
GEN 21:20 God was with the boy as he grew. He lived in the wilderness and became an archer.
GEN 21:21 He lived in the wilderness of Paran. His mother found a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
GEN 21:22 At that time Abimelech and Phicol, the commander of his army, said to Abraham, “God is with you in all that you do.
GEN 21:23 Now swear to me right here in God’s name that you will not deceive me, my children, or my descendants. Show me, and the land where you are staying, the same loyalty that I have shown you.”
GEN 21:24 Abraham said, “I swear to do this.”
GEN 21:25 But Abraham lodged a complaint against Abimelech concerning a well that Abimelech’s servants had seized.
GEN 21:26 “I do not know who has done this thing,” Abimelech replied. “Moreover, you did not tell me. I did not hear about it until today.”
GEN 21:27 Abraham took some sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelech. The two of them made a treaty.
GEN 21:28 Then Abraham set seven ewe lambs apart from the flock by themselves.
GEN 21:29 Abimelech asked Abraham, “What is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs that you have set apart?”
GEN 21:30 He replied, “You must take these seven ewe lambs from my hand as legal proof that I dug this well.”
GEN 21:31 That is why he named that place Beer Sheba, because the two of them swore an oath there.
GEN 21:32 So they made a treaty at Beer Sheba. Then Abimelech and Phicol, the commander of his army, returned to the land of the Philistines.
GEN 21:33 Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beer Sheba. There he worshiped the Lord, the eternal God.
GEN 21:34 So Abraham stayed in the land of the Philistines for quite some time.
GEN 22:1 Some time after these things God tested Abraham. He said to him, “Abraham!” “Here I am!” Abraham replied.
GEN 22:2 God said, “Take your son – your only son, whom you love, Isaac – and go to the land of Moriah! Offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains which I will indicate to you.”
GEN 22:3 Early in the morning Abraham got up and saddled his donkey. He took two of his young servants with him, along with his son Isaac. When he had cut the wood for the burnt offering, he started out for the place God had spoken to him about.
GEN 22:4 On the third day Abraham caught sight of the place in the distance.
GEN 22:5 So he said to his servants, “You two stay here with the donkey while the boy and I go up there. We will worship and then return to you.”
GEN 22:6 Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on his son Isaac. Then he took the fire and the knife in his hand, and the two of them walked on together.
GEN 22:7 Isaac said to his father Abraham, “My father?” “What is it, my son?” he replied. “Here is the fire and the wood,” Isaac said, “but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?”
GEN 22:8 “God will provide for himself the lamb for the burnt offering, my son,” Abraham replied. The two of them continued on together.
GEN 22:9 When they came to the place God had told him about, Abraham built the altar there and arranged the wood on it. Next he tied up his son Isaac and placed him on the altar on top of the wood.
GEN 22:10 Then Abraham reached out his hand, took the knife, and prepared to slaughter his son.
GEN 22:11 But the Lord’s angel called to him from heaven, “Abraham! Abraham!” “Here I am!” he answered.
GEN 22:12 “Do not harm the boy!” the angel said. “Do not do anything to him, for now I know that you fear God because you did not withhold your son, your only son, from me.”
GEN 22:13 Abraham looked up and saw behind him a ram caught in the bushes by its horns. So he went over and got the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering instead of his son.
GEN 22:14 And Abraham called the name of that place “The Lord provides.” It is said to this day, “In the mountain of the Lord provision will be made.”
GEN 22:15 The Lord’s angel called to Abraham a second time from heaven
GEN 22:16 and said, “‘I solemnly swear by my own name,’ decrees the Lord, ‘that because you have done this and have not withheld your son, your only son,
GEN 22:17 I will indeed bless you, and I will greatly multiply your descendants so that they will be as countless as the stars in the sky or the grains of sand on the seashore. Your descendants will take possession of the strongholds of their enemies.
GEN 22:18 Because you have obeyed me, all the nations of the earth will pronounce blessings on one another using the name of your descendants.’”
GEN 22:19 Then Abraham returned to his servants, and they set out together for Beer Sheba where Abraham stayed.
GEN 22:20 After these things Abraham was told, “Milcah also has borne children to your brother Nahor –
GEN 22:21 Uz the firstborn, his brother Buz, Kemuel (the father of Aram),
GEN 22:22 Kesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel.”
GEN 22:23 (Now Bethuel became the father of Rebekah.) These were the eight sons Milcah bore to Abraham’s brother Nahor.
GEN 22:24 His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore him children – Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.
GEN 23:1 Sarah lived 127 years.
GEN 23:2 Then she died in Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan. Abraham went to mourn for Sarah and to weep for her.
GEN 23:3 Then Abraham got up from mourning his dead wife and said to the sons of Heth,
GEN 23:4 “I am a temporary settler among you. Grant me ownership of a burial site among you so that I may bury my dead.”
GEN 23:5 The sons of Heth answered Abraham,
GEN 23:6 “Listen, sir, you are a mighty prince among us! You may bury your dead in the choicest of our tombs. None of us will refuse you his tomb to prevent you from burying your dead.”
GEN 23:7 Abraham got up and bowed down to the local people, the sons of Heth.
GEN 23:8 Then he said to them, “If you agree that I may bury my dead, then hear me out. Ask Ephron the son of Zohar
GEN 23:9 if he will sell me the cave of Machpelah that belongs to him; it is at the end of his field. Let him sell it to me publicly for the full price, so that I may own it as a burial site.”
GEN 23:10 (Now Ephron was sitting among the sons of Heth.) Ephron the Hethite replied to Abraham in the hearing of the sons of Heth – before all who entered the gate of his city –
GEN 23:11 “No, my lord! Hear me out. I sell you both the field and the cave that is in it. In the presence of my people I sell it to you. Bury your dead.”
GEN 23:12 Abraham bowed before the local people
GEN 23:13 and said to Ephron in their hearing, “Hear me, if you will. I pay to you the price of the field. Take it from me so that I may bury my dead there.”
GEN 23:14 Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
GEN 23:15 “Hear me, my lord. The land is worth 400 pieces of silver, but what is that between me and you? So bury your dead.”
GEN 23:16 So Abraham agreed to Ephron’s price and weighed out for him the price that Ephron had quoted in the hearing of the sons of Heth – 400 pieces of silver, according to the standard measurement at the time.
GEN 23:17 So Abraham secured Ephron’s field in Machpelah, next to Mamre, including the field, the cave that was in it, and all the trees that were in the field and all around its border,
GEN 23:18 as his property in the presence of the sons of Heth before all who entered the gate of Ephron’s city.
GEN 23:19 After this Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave in the field of Machpelah next to Mamre (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan.
GEN 23:20 So Abraham secured the field and the cave that was in it as a burial site from the sons of Heth.
GEN 24:1 Now Abraham was old, well advanced in years, and the Lord had blessed him in everything.
GEN 24:2 Abraham said to his servant, the senior one in his household who was in charge of everything he had, “Put your hand under my thigh
GEN 24:3 so that I may make you solemnly promise by the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the earth: You must not acquire a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am living.
GEN 24:4 You must go instead to my country and to my relatives to find a wife for my son Isaac.”
GEN 24:5 The servant asked him, “What if the woman is not willing to come back with me to this land? Must I then take your son back to the land from which you came?”
GEN 24:6 “Be careful never to take my son back there!” Abraham told him.
GEN 24:7 “The Lord, the God of heaven, who took me from my father’s house and the land of my relatives, promised me with a solemn oath, ‘To your descendants I will give this land.’ He will send his angel before you so that you may find a wife for my son from there.
GEN 24:8 But if the woman is not willing to come back with you, you will be free from this oath of mine. But you must not take my son back there!”
GEN 24:9 So the servant placed his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and gave his solemn promise he would carry out his wishes.
GEN 24:10 Then the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed with all kinds of gifts from his master at his disposal. He journeyed to the region of Aram Naharaim and the city of Nahor.
GEN 24:11 He made the camels kneel down by the well outside the city. It was evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water.
GEN 24:12 He prayed, “O Lord, God of my master Abraham, guide me today. Be faithful to my master Abraham.
GEN 24:13 Here I am, standing by the spring, and the daughters of the people who live in the town are coming out to draw water.
GEN 24:14 I will say to a young woman, ‘Please lower your jar so I may drink.’ May the one you have chosen for your servant Isaac reply, ‘Drink, and I’ll give your camels water too.’ In this way I will know that you have been faithful to my master.”
GEN 24:15 Before he had finished praying, there came Rebekah with her water jug on her shoulder. She was the daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah (Milcah was the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor).
GEN 24:16 Now the young woman was very beautiful. She was a virgin; no man had ever had sexual relations with her. She went down to the spring, filled her jug, and came back up.
GEN 24:17 Abraham’s servant ran to meet her and said, “Please give me a sip of water from your jug.”
GEN 24:18 “Drink, my lord,” she replied, and quickly lowering her jug to her hands, she gave him a drink.
GEN 24:19 When she had done so, she said, “I’ll draw water for your camels too, until they have drunk as much as they want.”
GEN 24:20 She quickly emptied her jug into the watering trough and ran back to the well to draw more water until she had drawn enough for all his camels.
GEN 24:21 Silently the man watched her with interest to determine if the Lord had made his journey successful or not.
GEN 24:22 After the camels had finished drinking, the man took out a gold nose ring weighing a beka and two gold bracelets weighing ten shekels and gave them to her.
GEN 24:23 “Whose daughter are you?” he asked. “Tell me, is there room in your father’s house for us to spend the night?”
GEN 24:24 She said to him, “I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom Milcah bore to Nahor.
GEN 24:25 We have plenty of straw and feed,” she added, “and room for you to spend the night.”
GEN 24:26 The man bowed his head and worshiped the Lord,
GEN 24:27 saying “Praised be the Lord, the God of my master Abraham, who has not abandoned his faithful love for my master! The Lord has led me to the house of my master’s relatives!”
GEN 24:28 The young woman ran and told her mother’s household all about these things.
GEN 24:29 (Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban.) Laban rushed out to meet the man at the spring.
GEN 24:30 When he saw the bracelets on his sister’s wrists and the nose ring and heard his sister Rebekah say, “This is what the man said to me,” he went out to meet the man. There he was, standing by the camels near the spring.
GEN 24:31 Laban said to him, “Come, you who are blessed by the Lord! Why are you standing out here when I have prepared the house and a place for the camels?”
GEN 24:32 So Abraham’s servant went to the house and unloaded the camels. Straw and feed were given to the camels, and water was provided so that he and the men who were with him could wash their feet.
GEN 24:33 When food was served, he said, “I will not eat until I have said what I want to say.” “Tell us,” Laban said.
GEN 24:34 “I am the servant of Abraham,” he began.
GEN 24:35 “The Lord has richly blessed my master and he has become very wealthy. The Lord has given him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys.
GEN 24:36 My master’s wife Sarah bore a son to him when she was old, and my master has given him everything he owns.
GEN 24:37 My master made me swear an oath. He said, ‘You must not acquire a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am living,
GEN 24:38 but you must go to the family of my father and to my relatives to find a wife for my son.’
GEN 24:39 But I said to my master, ‘What if the woman does not want to go with me?’
GEN 24:40 He answered, ‘The Lord, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you. He will make your journey a success and you will find a wife for my son from among my relatives, from my father’s family.
GEN 24:41 You will be free from your oath if you go to my relatives and they will not give her to you. Then you will be free from your oath.’
GEN 24:42 When I came to the spring today, I prayed, ‘O Lord, God of my master Abraham, if you have decided to make my journey successful, may events unfold as follows:
GEN 24:43 Here I am, standing by the spring. When the young woman goes out to draw water, I’ll say, “Give me a little water to drink from your jug.”
GEN 24:44 Then she will reply to me, “Drink, and I’ll draw water for your camels too.” May that woman be the one whom the Lord has chosen for my master’s son.’
GEN 24:45 “Before I finished praying in my heart, along came Rebekah with her water jug on her shoulder! She went down to the spring and drew water. So I said to her, ‘Please give me a drink.’
GEN 24:46 She quickly lowered her jug from her shoulder and said, ‘Drink, and I’ll give your camels water too.’ So I drank, and she also gave the camels water.
GEN 24:47 Then I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She replied, ‘The daughter of Bethuel the son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore to Nahor.’ I put the ring in her nose and the bracelets on her wrists.
GEN 24:48 Then I bowed down and worshiped the Lord. I praised the Lord, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to find the granddaughter of my master’s brother for his son.
GEN 24:49 Now, if you will show faithful love to my master, tell me. But if not, tell me as well, so that I may go on my way.”
GEN 24:50 Then Laban and Bethuel replied, “This is the Lord’s doing. Our wishes are of no concern.
GEN 24:51 Rebekah stands here before you. Take her and go so that she may become the wife of your master’s son, just as the Lord has decided.”
GEN 24:52 When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he bowed down to the ground before the Lord.
GEN 24:53 Then he brought out gold, silver jewelry, and clothing and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave valuable gifts to her brother and to her mother.
GEN 24:54 After this, he and the men who were with him ate a meal and stayed there overnight. When they got up in the morning, he said, “Let me leave now so I can return to my master.”
GEN 24:55 But Rebekah’s brother and her mother replied, “Let the girl stay with us a few more days, perhaps ten. Then she can go.”
GEN 24:56 But he said to them, “Don’t detain me – the Lord has granted me success on my journey. Let me leave now so I may return to my master.”
GEN 24:57 Then they said, “We’ll call the girl and find out what she wants to do.”
GEN 24:58 So they called Rebekah and asked her, “Do you want to go with this man?” She replied, “I want to go.”
GEN 24:59 So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way, accompanied by her female attendant, with Abraham’s servant and his men.
GEN 24:60 They blessed Rebekah with these words: “Our sister, may you become the mother of thousands of ten thousands! May your descendants possess the strongholds of their enemies.”
GEN 24:61 Then Rebekah and her female servants mounted the camels and rode away with the man. So Abraham’s servant took Rebekah and left.
GEN 24:62 Now Isaac came from Beer Lahai Roi, for he was living in the Negev.
GEN 24:63 He went out to relax in the field in the early evening. Then he looked up and saw that there were camels approaching.
GEN 24:64 Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac. She got down from her camel
GEN 24:65 and asked Abraham’s servant, “Who is that man walking in the field toward us?” “That is my master,” the servant replied. So she took her veil and covered herself.
GEN 24:66 The servant told Isaac everything that had happened.
GEN 24:67 Then Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah’s tent. He took her as his wife and loved her. So Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death.
GEN 25:1 Abraham had taken another wife, named Keturah.
GEN 25:2 She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.
GEN 25:3 Jokshan became the father of Sheba and Dedan. The descendants of Dedan were the Asshurites, Letushites, and Leummites.
GEN 25:4 The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were descendants of Keturah.
GEN 25:5 Everything he owned Abraham left to his son Isaac.
GEN 25:6 But while he was still alive, Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them off to the east, away from his son Isaac.
GEN 25:7 Abraham lived a total of 175 years.
GEN 25:8 Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, an old man who had lived a full life. He joined his ancestors.
GEN 25:9 His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah near Mamre, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar, the Hethite.
GEN 25:10 This was the field Abraham had purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried with his wife Sarah.
GEN 25:11 After Abraham’s death, God blessed his son Isaac. Isaac lived near Beer Lahai Roi.
GEN 25:12 This is the account of Abraham’s son Ishmael, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s servant, bore to Abraham.
GEN 25:13 These are the names of Ishmael’s sons, by their names according to their records: Nebaioth (Ishmael’s firstborn), Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
GEN 25:14 Mishma, Dumah, Massa,
GEN 25:15 Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
GEN 25:16 These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names by their settlements and their camps – twelve princes according to their clans.
GEN 25:17 Ishmael lived a total of 137 years. He breathed his last and died; then he joined his ancestors.
GEN 25:18 His descendants settled from Havilah to Shur, which runs next to Egypt all the way to Asshur. They settled away from all their relatives.
GEN 25:19 This is the account of Isaac, the son of Abraham. Abraham became the father of Isaac.
GEN 25:20 When Isaac was forty years old, he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan Aram and sister of Laban the Aramean.
GEN 25:21 Isaac prayed to the Lord on behalf of his wife because she was childless. The Lord answered his prayer, and his wife Rebekah became pregnant.
GEN 25:22 But the children struggled inside her, and she said, “If it is going to be like this, I’m not so sure I want to be pregnant!” So she asked the Lord,
GEN 25:23 and the Lord said to her, “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples will be separated from within you. One people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger.”
GEN 25:24 When the time came for Rebekah to give birth, there were twins in her womb.
GEN 25:25 The first came out reddish all over, like a hairy garment, so they named him Esau.
GEN 25:26 When his brother came out with his hand clutching Esau’s heel, they named him Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when they were born.
GEN 25:27 When the boys grew up, Esau became a skilled hunter, a man of the open fields, but Jacob was an even-tempered man, living in tents.
GEN 25:28 Isaac loved Esau because he had a taste for fresh game, but Rebekah loved Jacob.
GEN 25:29 Now Jacob cooked some stew, and when Esau came in from the open fields, he was famished.
GEN 25:30 So Esau said to Jacob, “Feed me some of the red stuff – yes, this red stuff – because I’m starving!” (That is why he was also called Edom.)
GEN 25:31 But Jacob replied, “First sell me your birthright.”
GEN 25:32 “Look,” said Esau, “I’m about to die! What use is the birthright to me?”
GEN 25:33 But Jacob said, “Swear an oath to me now.” So Esau swore an oath to him and sold his birthright to Jacob.
GEN 25:34 Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and lentil stew; Esau ate and drank, then got up and went out. So Esau despised his birthright.
GEN 26:1 There was a famine in the land, subsequent to the earlier famine that occurred in the days of Abraham. Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines at Gerar.
GEN 26:2 The Lord appeared to Isaac and said, “Do not go down to Egypt; settle down in the land that I will point out to you.
GEN 26:3 Stay in this land. Then I will be with you and will bless you, for I will give all these lands to you and to your descendants, and I will fulfill the solemn promise I made to your father Abraham.
GEN 26:4 I will multiply your descendants so they will be as numerous as the stars in the sky, and I will give them all these lands. All the nations of the earth will pronounce blessings on one another using the name of your descendants.
GEN 26:5 All this will come to pass because Abraham obeyed me and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.”
GEN 26:6 So Isaac settled in Gerar.
GEN 26:7 When the men of that place asked him about his wife, he replied, “She is my sister.” He was afraid to say, “She is my wife,” for he thought to himself, “The men of this place will kill me to get Rebekah because she is very beautiful.”
GEN 26:8 After Isaac had been there a long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines happened to look out a window and observed Isaac caressing his wife Rebekah.
GEN 26:9 So Abimelech summoned Isaac and said, “She is really your wife! Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’?” Isaac replied, “Because I thought someone might kill me to get her.”
GEN 26:10 Then Abimelech exclaimed, “What in the world have you done to us? One of the men might easily have had sexual relations with your wife, and you would have brought guilt on us!”
GEN 26:11 So Abimelech commanded all the people, “Whoever touches this man or his wife will surely be put to death.”
GEN 26:12 When Isaac planted in that land, he reaped in the same year a hundred times what he had sown, because the Lord blessed him.
GEN 26:13 The man became wealthy. His influence continued to grow until he became very prominent.
GEN 26:14 He had so many sheep and cattle and such a great household of servants that the Philistines became jealous of him.
GEN 26:15 So the Philistines took dirt and filled up all the wells that his father’s servants had dug back in the days of his father Abraham.
GEN 26:16 Then Abimelech said to Isaac, “Leave us and go elsewhere, for you have become much more powerful than we are.”
GEN 26:17 So Isaac left there and settled in the Gerar Valley.
GEN 26:18 Isaac reopened the wells that had been dug back in the days of his father Abraham, for the Philistines had stopped them up after Abraham died. Isaac gave these wells the same names his father had given them.
GEN 26:19 When Isaac’s servants dug in the valley and discovered a well with fresh flowing water there,
GEN 26:20 the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac’s herdsmen, saying, “The water belongs to us!” So Isaac named the well Esek because they argued with him about it.
GEN 26:21 His servants dug another well, but they quarreled over it too, so Isaac named it Sitnah.
GEN 26:22 Then he moved away from there and dug another well. They did not quarrel over it, so Isaac named it Rehoboth, saying, “For now the Lord has made room for us, and we will prosper in the land.”
GEN 26:23 From there Isaac went up to Beer Sheba.
GEN 26:24 The Lord appeared to him that night and said, “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the sake of my servant Abraham.”
GEN 26:25 Then Isaac built an altar there and worshiped the Lord. He pitched his tent there, and his servants dug a well.
GEN 26:26 Now Abimelech had come to him from Gerar along with Ahuzzah his friend and Phicol the commander of his army.
GEN 26:27 Isaac asked them, “Why have you come to me? You hate me and sent me away from you.”
GEN 26:28 They replied, “We could plainly see that the Lord is with you. So we decided there should be a pact between us – between us and you. Allow us to make a treaty with you
GEN 26:29 so that you will not do us any harm, just as we have not harmed you, but have always treated you well before sending you away in peace. Now you are blessed by the Lord.”
GEN 26:30 So Isaac held a feast for them and they celebrated.
GEN 26:31 Early in the morning the men made a treaty with each other. Isaac sent them off; they separated on good terms.
GEN 26:32 That day Isaac’s servants came and told him about the well they had dug. “We’ve found water,” they reported.
GEN 26:33 So he named it Shibah; that is why the name of the city has been Beer Sheba to this day.
GEN 26:34 When Esau was forty years old, he married Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, as well as Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite.
GEN 26:35 They caused Isaac and Rebekah great anxiety.
GEN 27:1 When Isaac was old and his eyes were so weak that he was almost blind, he called his older son Esau and said to him, “My son!” “Here I am!” Esau replied.
GEN 27:2 Isaac said, “Since I am so old, I could die at any time.
GEN 27:3 Therefore, take your weapons – your quiver and your bow – and go out into the open fields and hunt down some wild game for me.
GEN 27:4 Then prepare for me some tasty food, the kind I love, and bring it to me. Then I will eat it so that I may bless you before I die.”
GEN 27:5 Now Rebekah had been listening while Isaac spoke to his son Esau. When Esau went out to the open fields to hunt down some wild game and bring it back,
GEN 27:6 Rebekah said to her son Jacob, “Look, I overheard your father tell your brother Esau,
GEN 27:7 ‘Bring me some wild game and prepare for me some tasty food. Then I will eat it and bless you in the presence of the Lord before I die.’
GEN 27:8 Now then, my son, do exactly what I tell you!
GEN 27:9 Go to the flock and get me two of the best young goats. I’ll prepare them in a tasty way for your father, just the way he loves them.
GEN 27:10 Then you will take it to your father. Thus he will eat it and bless you before he dies.”
GEN 27:11 “But Esau my brother is a hairy man,” Jacob protested to his mother Rebekah, “and I have smooth skin!
GEN 27:12 My father may touch me! Then he’ll think I’m mocking him and I’ll bring a curse on myself instead of a blessing.”
GEN 27:13 So his mother told him, “Any curse against you will fall on me, my son! Just obey me! Go and get them for me!”
GEN 27:14 So he went and got the goats and brought them to his mother. She prepared some tasty food, just the way his father loved it.
GEN 27:15 Then Rebekah took her older son Esau’s best clothes, which she had with her in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob.
GEN 27:16 She put the skins of the young goats on his hands and the smooth part of his neck.
GEN 27:17 Then she handed the tasty food and the bread she had made to her son Jacob.
GEN 27:18 He went to his father and said, “My father!” Isaac replied, “Here I am. Which are you, my son?”
GEN 27:19 Jacob said to his father, “I am Esau, your firstborn. I’ve done as you told me. Now sit up and eat some of my wild game so that you can bless me.”
GEN 27:20 But Isaac asked his son, “How in the world did you find it so quickly, my son?” “Because the Lord your God brought it to me,” he replied.
GEN 27:21 Then Isaac said to Jacob, “Come closer so I can touch you, my son, and know for certain if you really are my son Esau.”
GEN 27:22 So Jacob went over to his father Isaac, who felt him and said, “The voice is Jacob’s, but the hands are Esau’s.”
GEN 27:23 He did not recognize him because his hands were hairy, like his brother Esau’s hands. So Isaac blessed Jacob.
GEN 27:24 Then he asked, “Are you really my son Esau?” “I am,” Jacob replied.
GEN 27:25 Isaac said, “Bring some of the wild game for me to eat, my son. Then I will bless you.” So Jacob brought it to him, and he ate it. He also brought him wine, and Isaac drank.
GEN 27:26 Then his father Isaac said to him, “Come here and kiss me, my son.”
GEN 27:27 So Jacob went over and kissed him. When Isaac caught the scent of his clothing, he blessed him, saying, “Yes, my son smells like the scent of an open field which the Lord has blessed.
GEN 27:28 May God give you the dew of the sky and the richness of the earth, and plenty of grain and new wine.
GEN 27:29 May peoples serve you and nations bow down to you. You will be lord over your brothers, and the sons of your mother will bow down to you. May those who curse you be cursed, and those who bless you be blessed.”
GEN 27:30 Isaac had just finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had scarcely left his father’s presence, when his brother Esau returned from the hunt.
GEN 27:31 He also prepared some tasty food and brought it to his father. Esau said to him, “My father, get up and eat some of your son’s wild game. Then you can bless me.”
GEN 27:32 His father Isaac asked, “Who are you?” “I am your firstborn son,” he replied, “Esau!”
GEN 27:33 Isaac began to shake violently and asked, “Then who else hunted game and brought it to me? I ate all of it just before you arrived, and I blessed him. He will indeed be blessed!”
GEN 27:34 When Esau heard his father’s words, he wailed loudly and bitterly. He said to his father, “Bless me too, my father!”
GEN 27:35 But Isaac replied, “Your brother came in here deceitfully and took away your blessing.”
GEN 27:36 Esau exclaimed, “‘Jacob’ is the right name for him! He has tripped me up two times! He took away my birthright, and now, look, he has taken away my blessing!” Then he asked, “Have you not kept back a blessing for me?”
GEN 27:37 Isaac replied to Esau, “Look! I have made him lord over you. I have made all his relatives his servants and provided him with grain and new wine. What is left that I can do for you, my son?”
GEN 27:38 Esau said to his father, “Do you have only that one blessing, my father? Bless me too!” Then Esau wept loudly.
GEN 27:39 So his father Isaac said to him, “Indeed, your home will be away from the richness of the earth, and away from the dew of the sky above.
GEN 27:40 You will live by your sword but you will serve your brother. When you grow restless, you will tear off his yoke from your neck.”
GEN 27:41 So Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing his father had given to his brother. Esau said privately, “The time of mourning for my father is near; then I will kill my brother Jacob!”
GEN 27:42 When Rebekah heard what her older son Esau had said, she quickly summoned her younger son Jacob and told him, “Look, your brother Esau is planning to get revenge by killing you.
GEN 27:43 Now then, my son, do what I say. Run away immediately to my brother Laban in Haran.
GEN 27:44 Live with him for a little while until your brother’s rage subsides.
GEN 27:45 Stay there until your brother’s anger against you subsides and he forgets what you did to him. Then I’ll send someone to bring you back from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?”
GEN 27:46 Then Rebekah said to Isaac, “I am deeply depressed because of these daughters of Heth. If Jacob were to marry one of these daughters of Heth who live in this land, I would want to die!”
GEN 28:1 So Isaac called for Jacob and blessed him. Then he commanded him, “You must not marry a Canaanite woman!
GEN 28:2 Leave immediately for Paddan Aram! Go to the house of Bethuel, your mother’s father, and find yourself a wife there, among the daughters of Laban, your mother’s brother.
GEN 28:3 May the sovereign God bless you! May he make you fruitful and give you a multitude of descendants! Then you will become a large nation.
GEN 28:4 May he give you and your descendants the blessing he gave to Abraham so that you may possess the land God gave to Abraham, the land where you have been living as a temporary resident.”
GEN 28:5 So Isaac sent Jacob on his way, and he went to Paddan Aram, to Laban son of Bethuel the Aramean and brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau.
GEN 28:6 Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him off to Paddan Aram to find a wife there. As he blessed him, Isaac commanded him, “You must not marry a Canaanite woman.”
GEN 28:7 Jacob obeyed his father and mother and left for Paddan Aram.
GEN 28:8 Then Esau realized that the Canaanite women were displeasing to his father Isaac.
GEN 28:9 So Esau went to Ishmael and married Mahalath, the sister of Nebaioth and daughter of Abraham’s son Ishmael, along with the wives he already had.
GEN 28:10 Meanwhile Jacob left Beer Sheba and set out for Haran.
GEN 28:11 He reached a certain place where he decided to camp because the sun had gone down. He took one of the stones and placed it near his head. Then he fell asleep in that place
GEN 28:12 and had a dream. He saw a stairway erected on the earth with its top reaching to the heavens. The angels of God were going up and coming down it
GEN 28:13 and the Lord stood at its top. He said, “I am the Lord, the God of your grandfather Abraham and the God of your father Isaac. I will give you and your descendants the ground you are lying on.
GEN 28:14 Your descendants will be like the dust of the earth, and you will spread out to the west, east, north, and south. All the families of the earth will pronounce blessings on one another using your name and that of your descendants.
GEN 28:15 I am with you! I will protect you wherever you go and will bring you back to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I promised you!”
GEN 28:16 Then Jacob woke up and thought, “Surely the Lord is in this place, but I did not realize it!”
GEN 28:17 He was afraid and said, “What an awesome place this is! This is nothing else than the house of God! This is the gate of heaven!”
GEN 28:18 Early in the morning Jacob took the stone he had placed near his head and set it up as a sacred stone. Then he poured oil on top of it.
GEN 28:19 He called that place Bethel, although the former name of the town was Luz.
GEN 28:20 Then Jacob made a vow, saying, “If God is with me and protects me on this journey I am taking and gives me food to eat and clothing to wear,
GEN 28:21 and I return safely to my father’s home, then the Lord will become my God.
GEN 28:22 Then this stone that I have set up as a sacred stone will be the house of God, and I will surely give you back a tenth of everything you give me.”
GEN 29:1 So Jacob moved on and came to the land of the eastern people.
GEN 29:2 He saw in the field a well with three flocks of sheep lying beside it, because the flocks were watered from that well. Now a large stone covered the mouth of the well.
GEN 29:3 When all the flocks were gathered there, the shepherds would roll the stone off the mouth of the well and water the sheep. Then they would put the stone back in its place over the well’s mouth.
GEN 29:4 Jacob asked them, “My brothers, where are you from?” They replied, “We’re from Haran.”
GEN 29:5 So he said to them, “Do you know Laban, the grandson of Nahor?” “We know him,” they said.
GEN 29:6 “Is he well?” Jacob asked. They replied, “He is well. Now look, here comes his daughter Rachel with the sheep.”
GEN 29:7 Then Jacob said, “Since it is still the middle of the day, it is not time for the flocks to be gathered. You should water the sheep and then go and let them graze some more.”
GEN 29:8 “We can’t,” they said, “until all the flocks are gathered and the stone is rolled off the mouth of the well. Then we water the sheep.”
GEN 29:9 While he was still speaking with them, Rachel arrived with her father’s sheep, for she was tending them.
GEN 29:10 When Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of his uncle Laban, and the sheep of his uncle Laban, he went over and rolled the stone off the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of his uncle Laban.
GEN 29:11 Then Jacob kissed Rachel and began to weep loudly.
GEN 29:12 When Jacob explained to Rachel that he was a relative of her father and the son of Rebekah, she ran and told her father.
GEN 29:13 When Laban heard this news about Jacob, his sister’s son, he rushed out to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him to his house. Jacob told Laban how he was related to him.
GEN 29:14 Then Laban said to him, “You are indeed my own flesh and blood.” So Jacob stayed with him for a month.
GEN 29:15 Then Laban said to Jacob, “Should you work for me for nothing because you are my relative? Tell me what your wages should be.”
GEN 29:16 (Now Laban had two daughters; the older one was named Leah, and the younger one Rachel.
GEN 29:17 Leah’s eyes were tender, but Rachel had a lovely figure and beautiful appearance.)
GEN 29:18 Since Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, he said, “I’ll serve you seven years in exchange for your younger daughter Rachel.”
GEN 29:19 Laban replied, “I’d rather give her to you than to another man. Stay with me.”
GEN 29:20 So Jacob worked for seven years to acquire Rachel. But they seemed like only a few days to him because his love for her was so great.
GEN 29:21 Finally Jacob said to Laban, “Give me my wife, for my time of service is up. I want to have marital relations with her.”
GEN 29:22 So Laban invited all the people of that place and prepared a feast.
GEN 29:23 In the evening he brought his daughter Leah to Jacob, and Jacob had marital relations with her.
GEN 29:24 (Laban gave his female servant Zilpah to his daughter Leah to be her servant.)
GEN 29:25 In the morning Jacob discovered it was Leah! So Jacob said to Laban, “What in the world have you done to me! Didn’t I work for you in exchange for Rachel? Why have you tricked me?”
GEN 29:26 “It is not our custom here,” Laban replied, “to give the younger daughter in marriage before the firstborn.
GEN 29:27 Complete my older daughter’s bridal week. Then we will give you the younger one too, in exchange for seven more years of work.”
GEN 29:28 Jacob did as Laban said. When Jacob completed Leah’s bridal week, Laban gave him his daughter Rachel to be his wife.
GEN 29:29 (Laban gave his female servant Bilhah to his daughter Rachel to be her servant.)
GEN 29:30 Jacob had marital relations with Rachel as well. He loved Rachel more than Leah, so he worked for Laban for seven more years.
GEN 29:31 When the Lord saw that Leah was unloved, he enabled her to become pregnant while Rachel remained childless.
GEN 29:32 So Leah became pregnant and gave birth to a son. She named him Reuben, for she said, “The Lord has looked with pity on my oppressed condition. Surely my husband will love me now.”
GEN 29:33 She became pregnant again and had another son. She said, “Because the Lord heard that I was unloved, he gave me this one too.” So she named him Simeon.
GEN 29:34 She became pregnant again and had another son. She said, “Now this time my husband will show me affection, because I have given birth to three sons for him.” That is why he was named Levi.
GEN 29:35 She became pregnant again and had another son. She said, “This time I will praise the Lord.” That is why she named him Judah. Then she stopped having children.
GEN 30:1 When Rachel saw that she could not give Jacob children, she became jealous of her sister. She said to Jacob, “Give me children or I’ll die!”
GEN 30:2 Jacob became furious with Rachel and exclaimed, “Am I in the place of God, who has kept you from having children?”
GEN 30:3 She replied, “Here is my servant Bilhah! Have sexual relations with her so that she can bear children for me and I can have a family through her.”
GEN 30:4 So Rachel gave him her servant Bilhah as a wife, and Jacob had marital relations with her.
GEN 30:5 Bilhah became pregnant and gave Jacob a son.
GEN 30:6 Then Rachel said, “God has vindicated me. He has responded to my prayer and given me a son.” That is why she named him Dan.
GEN 30:7 Bilhah, Rachel’s servant, became pregnant again and gave Jacob another son.
GEN 30:8 Then Rachel said, “I have fought a desperate struggle with my sister, but I have won.” So she named him Naphtali.
GEN 30:9 When Leah saw that she had stopped having children, she gave her servant Zilpah to Jacob as a wife.
GEN 30:10 Soon Leah’s servant Zilpah gave Jacob a son.
GEN 30:11 Leah said, “How fortunate!” So she named him Gad.
GEN 30:12 Then Leah’s servant Zilpah gave Jacob another son.
GEN 30:13 Leah said, “How happy I am, for women will call me happy!” So she named him Asher.
GEN 30:14 At the time of the wheat harvest Reuben went out and found some mandrake plants in a field and brought them to his mother Leah. Rachel said to Leah, “Give me some of your son’s mandrakes.”
GEN 30:15 But Leah replied, “Wasn’t it enough that you’ve taken away my husband? Would you take away my son’s mandrakes too?” “All right,” Rachel said, “he may sleep with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.”
GEN 30:16 When Jacob came in from the fields that evening, Leah went out to meet him and said, “You must sleep with me because I have paid for your services with my son’s mandrakes.” So he had marital relations with her that night.
GEN 30:17 God paid attention to Leah; she became pregnant and gave Jacob a son for the fifth time.
GEN 30:18 Then Leah said, “God has granted me a reward because I gave my servant to my husband as a wife.” So she named him Issachar.
GEN 30:19 Leah became pregnant again and gave Jacob a son for the sixth time.
GEN 30:20 Then Leah said, “God has given me a good gift. Now my husband will honor me because I have given him six sons.” So she named him Zebulun.
GEN 30:21 After that she gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah.
GEN 30:22 Then God took note of Rachel. He paid attention to her and enabled her to become pregnant.
GEN 30:23 She became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Then she said, “God has taken away my shame.”
GEN 30:24 She named him Joseph, saying, “May the Lord give me yet another son.”
GEN 30:25 After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, “Send me on my way so that I can go home to my own country.
GEN 30:26 Let me take my wives and my children whom I have acquired by working for you. Then I’ll depart, because you know how hard I’ve worked for you.”
GEN 30:27 But Laban said to him, “If I have found favor in your sight, please stay here, for I have learned by divination that the Lord has blessed me on account of you.”
GEN 30:28 He added, “Just name your wages – I’ll pay whatever you want.”
GEN 30:29 “You know how I have worked for you,” Jacob replied, “and how well your livestock have fared under my care.
GEN 30:30 Indeed, you had little before I arrived, but now your possessions have increased many times over. The Lord has blessed you wherever I worked. But now, how long must it be before I do something for my own family too?”
GEN 30:31 So Laban asked, “What should I give you?” “You don’t need to give me a thing,” Jacob replied, “but if you agree to this one condition, I will continue to care for your flocks and protect them:
GEN 30:32 Let me walk among all your flocks today and remove from them every speckled or spotted sheep, every dark-colored lamb, and the spotted or speckled goats. These animals will be my wages.
GEN 30:33 My integrity will testify for me later on. When you come to verify that I’ve taken only the wages we agreed on, if I have in my possession any goat that is not speckled or spotted or any sheep that is not dark-colored, it will be considered stolen.”
GEN 30:34 “Agreed!” said Laban, “It will be as you say.”
GEN 30:35 So that day Laban removed the male goats that were streaked or spotted, all the female goats that were speckled or spotted (all that had any white on them), and all the dark-colored lambs, and put them in the care of his sons.
GEN 30:36 Then he separated them from Jacob by a three-day journey, while Jacob was taking care of the rest of Laban’s flocks.
GEN 30:37 But Jacob took fresh-cut branches from poplar, almond, and plane trees. He made white streaks by peeling them, making the white inner wood in the branches visible.
GEN 30:38 Then he set up the peeled branches in all the watering troughs where the flocks came to drink. He set up the branches in front of the flocks when they were in heat and came to drink.
GEN 30:39 When the sheep mated in front of the branches, they gave birth to young that were streaked or speckled or spotted.
GEN 30:40 Jacob removed these lambs, but he made the rest of the flock face the streaked and completely dark-colored animals in Laban’s flock. So he made separate flocks for himself and did not mix them with Laban’s flocks.
GEN 30:41 When the stronger females were in heat, Jacob would set up the branches in the troughs in front of the flock, so they would mate near the branches.
GEN 30:42 But if the animals were weaker, he did not set the branches there. So the weaker animals ended up belonging to Laban and the stronger animals to Jacob.
GEN 30:43 In this way Jacob became extremely prosperous. He owned large flocks, male and female servants, camels, and donkeys.
GEN 31:1 Jacob heard that Laban’s sons were complaining, “Jacob has taken everything that belonged to our father! He has gotten rich at our father’s expense!”
GEN 31:2 When Jacob saw the look on Laban’s face, he could tell his attitude toward him had changed.
GEN 31:3 The Lord said to Jacob, “Return to the land of your fathers and to your relatives. I will be with you.”
GEN 31:4 So Jacob sent a message for Rachel and Leah to come to the field where his flocks were.
GEN 31:5 There he said to them, “I can tell that your father’s attitude toward me has changed, but the God of my father has been with me.
GEN 31:6 You know that I’ve worked for your father as hard as I could,
GEN 31:7 but your father has humiliated me and changed my wages ten times. But God has not permitted him to do me any harm.
GEN 31:8 If he said, ‘The speckled animals will be your wage,’ then the entire flock gave birth to speckled offspring. But if he said, ‘The streaked animals will be your wage,’ then the entire flock gave birth to streaked offspring.
GEN 31:9 In this way God has snatched away your father’s livestock and given them to me.
GEN 31:10 “Once during breeding season I saw in a dream that the male goats mating with the flock were streaked, speckled, and spotted.
GEN 31:11 In the dream the angel of God said to me, ‘Jacob!’ ‘Here I am!’ I replied.
GEN 31:12 Then he said, ‘Observe that all the male goats mating with the flock are streaked, speckled, or spotted, for I have observed all that Laban has done to you.
GEN 31:13 I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed the sacred stone and made a vow to me. Now leave this land immediately and return to your native land.’”
GEN 31:14 Then Rachel and Leah replied to him, “Do we still have any portion or inheritance in our father’s house?
GEN 31:15 Hasn’t he treated us like foreigners? He not only sold us, but completely wasted the money paid for us!
GEN 31:16 Surely all the wealth that God snatched away from our father belongs to us and to our children. So now do everything God has told you.”
GEN 31:17 So Jacob immediately put his children and his wives on the camels.
GEN 31:18 He took away all the livestock he had acquired in Paddan Aram and all his moveable property that he had accumulated. Then he set out toward the land of Canaan to return to his father Isaac.
GEN 31:19 While Laban had gone to shear his sheep, Rachel stole the household idols that belonged to her father.
GEN 31:20 Jacob also deceived Laban the Aramean by not telling him that he was leaving.
GEN 31:21 He left with all he owned. He quickly crossed the Euphrates River and headed for the hill country of Gilead.
GEN 31:22 Three days later Laban discovered Jacob had left.
GEN 31:23 So he took his relatives with him and pursued Jacob for seven days. He caught up with him in the hill country of Gilead.
GEN 31:24 But God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream at night and warned him, “Be careful that you neither bless nor curse Jacob.”
GEN 31:25 Laban overtook Jacob, and when Jacob pitched his tent in the hill country of Gilead, Laban and his relatives set up camp there too.
GEN 31:26 “What have you done?” Laban demanded of Jacob. “You’ve deceived me and carried away my daughters as if they were captives of war!
GEN 31:27 Why did you run away secretly and deceive me? Why didn’t you tell me so I could send you off with a celebration complete with singing, tambourines, and harps?
GEN 31:28 You didn’t even allow me to kiss my daughters and my grandchildren good-bye. You have acted foolishly!
GEN 31:29 I have the power to do you harm, but the God of your father told me last night, ‘Be careful that you neither bless nor curse Jacob.’
GEN 31:30 Now I understand that you have gone away because you longed desperately for your father’s house. Yet why did you steal my gods?”
GEN 31:31 “I left secretly because I was afraid!” Jacob replied to Laban. “I thought you might take your daughters away from me by force.
GEN 31:32 Whoever has taken your gods will be put to death! In the presence of our relatives identify whatever is yours and take it.” (Now Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them.)
GEN 31:33 So Laban entered Jacob’s tent, and Leah’s tent, and the tent of the two female servants, but he did not find the idols. Then he left Leah’s tent and entered Rachel’s.
GEN 31:34 (Now Rachel had taken the idols and put them inside her camel’s saddle and sat on them.) Laban searched the whole tent, but did not find them.
GEN 31:35 Rachel said to her father, “Don’t be angry, my lord. I cannot stand up in your presence because I am having my period.” So he searched thoroughly, but did not find the idols.
GEN 31:36 Jacob became angry and argued with Laban. “What did I do wrong?” he demanded of Laban. “What sin of mine prompted you to chase after me in hot pursuit?
GEN 31:37 When you searched through all my goods, did you find anything that belonged to you? Set it here before my relatives and yours, and let them settle the dispute between the two of us!
GEN 31:38 “I have been with you for the past twenty years. Your ewes and female goats have not miscarried, nor have I eaten rams from your flocks.
GEN 31:39 Animals torn by wild beasts I never brought to you; I always absorbed the loss myself. You always made me pay for every missing animal, whether it was taken by day or at night.
GEN 31:40 I was consumed by scorching heat during the day and by piercing cold at night, and I went without sleep.
GEN 31:41 This was my lot for twenty years in your house: I worked like a slave for you – fourteen years for your two daughters and six years for your flocks, but you changed my wages ten times!
GEN 31:42 If the God of my father – the God of Abraham, the one whom Isaac fears – had not been with me, you would certainly have sent me away empty-handed! But God saw how I was oppressed and how hard I worked, and he rebuked you last night.”
GEN 31:43 Laban replied to Jacob, “These women are my daughters, these children are my grandchildren, and these flocks are my flocks. All that you see belongs to me. But how can I harm these daughters of mine today or the children to whom they have given birth?
GEN 31:44 So now, come, let’s make a formal agreement, you and I, and it will be proof that we have made peace.”
GEN 31:45 So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a memorial pillar.
GEN 31:46 Then he said to his relatives, “Gather stones.” So they brought stones and put them in a pile. They ate there by the pile of stones.
GEN 31:47 Laban called it Jegar Sahadutha, but Jacob called it Galeed.
GEN 31:48 Laban said, “This pile of stones is a witness of our agreement today.” That is why it was called Galeed.
GEN 31:49 It was also called Mizpah because he said, “May the Lord watch between us when we are out of sight of one another.
GEN 31:50 If you mistreat my daughters or if you take wives besides my daughters, although no one else is with us, realize that God is witness to your actions.”
GEN 31:51 “Here is this pile of stones and this pillar I have set up between me and you,” Laban said to Jacob.
GEN 31:52 “This pile of stones and the pillar are reminders that I will not pass beyond this pile to come to harm you and that you will not pass beyond this pile and this pillar to come to harm me.
GEN 31:53 May the God of Abraham and the god of Nahor, the gods of their father, judge between us.” Jacob took an oath by the God whom his father Isaac feared.
GEN 31:54 Then Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain and invited his relatives to eat the meal. They ate the meal and spent the night on the mountain.
GEN 31:55 Early in the morning Laban kissed his grandchildren and his daughters goodbye and blessed them. Then Laban left and returned home.
GEN 32:1 So Jacob went on his way and the angels of God met him.
GEN 32:2 When Jacob saw them, he exclaimed, “This is the camp of God!” So he named that place Mahanaim.
GEN 32:3 Jacob sent messengers on ahead to his brother Esau in the land of Seir, the region of Edom.
GEN 32:4 He commanded them, “This is what you must say to my lord Esau: ‘This is what your servant Jacob says: I have been staying with Laban until now.
GEN 32:5 I have oxen, donkeys, sheep, and male and female servants. I have sent this message to inform my lord, so that I may find favor in your sight.’”
GEN 32:6 The messengers returned to Jacob and said, “We went to your brother Esau. He is coming to meet you and has four hundred men with him.”
GEN 32:7 Jacob was very afraid and upset. So he divided the people who were with him into two camps, as well as the flocks, herds, and camels.
GEN 32:8 “If Esau attacks one camp,” he thought, “then the other camp will be able to escape.”
GEN 32:9 Then Jacob prayed, “O God of my father Abraham, God of my father Isaac, O Lord, you said to me, ‘Return to your land and to your relatives and I will make you prosper.’
GEN 32:10 I am not worthy of all the faithful love you have shown your servant. With only my walking stick I crossed the Jordan, but now I have become two camps.
GEN 32:11 Rescue me, I pray, from the hand of my brother Esau, for I am afraid he will come and attack me, as well as the mothers with their children.
GEN 32:12 But you said, ‘I will certainly make you prosper and will make your descendants like the sand on the seashore, too numerous to count.’”
GEN 32:13 Jacob stayed there that night. Then he sent as a gift to his brother Esau
GEN 32:14 two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
GEN 32:15 thirty female camels with their young, forty cows and ten bulls, and twenty female donkeys and ten male donkeys.
GEN 32:16 He entrusted them to his servants, who divided them into herds. He told his servants, “Pass over before me, and keep some distance between one herd and the next.”
GEN 32:17 He instructed the servant leading the first herd, “When my brother Esau meets you and asks, ‘To whom do you belong? Where are you going? Whose herds are you driving?’
GEN 32:18 then you must say, ‘They belong to your servant Jacob. They have been sent as a gift to my lord Esau. In fact Jacob himself is behind us.’”
GEN 32:19 He also gave these instructions to the second and third servants, as well as all those who were following the herds, saying, “You must say the same thing to Esau when you meet him.
GEN 32:20 You must also say, ‘In fact your servant Jacob is behind us.’” Jacob thought, “I will first appease him by sending a gift ahead of me. After that I will meet him. Perhaps he will accept me.”
GEN 32:21 So the gifts were sent on ahead of him while he spent that night in the camp.
GEN 32:22 During the night Jacob quickly took his two wives, his two female servants, and his eleven sons and crossed the ford of the Jabbok.
GEN 32:23 He took them and sent them across the stream along with all his possessions.
GEN 32:24 So Jacob was left alone. Then a man wrestled with him until daybreak.
GEN 32:25 When the man saw that he could not defeat Jacob, he struck the socket of his hip so the socket of Jacob’s hip was dislocated while he wrestled with him.
GEN 32:26 Then the man said, “Let me go, for the dawn is breaking.” “I will not let you go,” Jacob replied, “unless you bless me.”
GEN 32:27 The man asked him, “What is your name?” He answered, “Jacob.”
GEN 32:28 “No longer will your name be Jacob,” the man told him, “but Israel, because you have fought with God and with men and have prevailed.”
GEN 32:29 Then Jacob asked, “Please tell me your name.” “Why do you ask my name?” the man replied. Then he blessed Jacob there.
GEN 32:30 So Jacob named the place Peniel, explaining, “Certainly I have seen God face to face and have survived.”
GEN 32:31 The sun rose over him as he crossed over Penuel, but he was limping because of his hip.
GEN 32:32 That is why to this day the Israelites do not eat the sinew which is attached to the socket of the hip, because he struck the socket of Jacob’s hip near the attached sinew.
GEN 33:1 Jacob looked up and saw that Esau was coming along with four hundred men. So he divided the children among Leah, Rachel, and the two female servants.
GEN 33:2 He put the servants and their children in front, with Leah and her children behind them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them.
GEN 33:3 But Jacob himself went on ahead of them, and he bowed toward the ground seven times as he approached his brother.
GEN 33:4 But Esau ran to meet him, embraced him, hugged his neck, and kissed him. Then they both wept.
GEN 33:5 When Esau looked up and saw the women and the children, he asked, “Who are these people with you?” Jacob replied, “The children whom God has graciously given your servant.”
GEN 33:6 The female servants came forward with their children and bowed down.
GEN 33:7 Then Leah came forward with her children and they bowed down. Finally Joseph and Rachel came forward and bowed down.
GEN 33:8 Esau then asked, “What did you intend by sending all these herds to meet me?” Jacob replied, “To find favor in your sight, my lord.”
GEN 33:9 But Esau said, “I have plenty, my brother. Keep what belongs to you.”
GEN 33:10 “No, please take them,” Jacob said. “If I have found favor in your sight, accept my gift from my hand. Now that I have seen your face and you have accepted me, it is as if I have seen the face of God.
GEN 33:11 Please take my present that was brought to you, for God has been generous to me and I have all I need.” When Jacob urged him, he took it.
GEN 33:12 Then Esau said, “Let’s be on our way! I will go in front of you.”
GEN 33:13 But Jacob said to him, “My lord knows that the children are young, and that I have to look after the sheep and cattle that are nursing their young. If they are driven too hard for even a single day, all the animals will die.
GEN 33:14 Let my lord go on ahead of his servant. I will travel more slowly, at the pace of the herds and the children, until I come to my lord at Seir.”
GEN 33:15 So Esau said, “Let me leave some of my men with you.” “Why do that?” Jacob replied. “My lord has already been kind enough to me.”
GEN 33:16 So that same day Esau made his way back to Seir.
GEN 33:17 But Jacob traveled to Succoth where he built himself a house and made shelters for his livestock. That is why the place was called Succoth.
GEN 33:18 After he left Paddan Aram, Jacob came safely to the city of Shechem in the land of Canaan, and he camped near the city.
GEN 33:19 Then he purchased the portion of the field where he had pitched his tent; he bought it from the sons of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for a hundred pieces of money.
GEN 33:20 There he set up an altar and called it “The God of Israel is God.”
GEN 34:1 Now Dinah, Leah’s daughter whom she bore to Jacob, went to meet the young women of the land.
GEN 34:2 When Shechem son of Hamor the Hivite, who ruled that area, saw her, he grabbed her, forced himself on her, and sexually assaulted her.
GEN 34:3 Then he became very attached to Dinah, Jacob’s daughter. He fell in love with the young woman and spoke romantically to her.
GEN 34:4 Shechem said to his father Hamor, “Acquire this young girl as my wife.”
GEN 34:5 When Jacob heard that Shechem had violated his daughter Dinah, his sons were with the livestock in the field. So Jacob remained silent until they came in.
GEN 34:6 Then Shechem’s father Hamor went to speak with Jacob about Dinah.
GEN 34:7 Now Jacob’s sons had come in from the field when they heard the news. They were offended and very angry because Shechem had disgraced Israel by sexually assaulting Jacob’s daughter, a crime that should not be committed.
GEN 34:8 But Hamor made this appeal to them: “My son Shechem is in love with your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife.
GEN 34:9 Intermarry with us. Let us marry your daughters, and take our daughters as wives for yourselves.
GEN 34:10 You may live among us, and the land will be open to you. Live in it, travel freely in it, and acquire property in it.”
GEN 34:11 Then Shechem said to Dinah’s father and brothers, “Let me find favor in your sight, and whatever you require of me I’ll give.
GEN 34:12 You can make the bride price and the gift I must bring very expensive, and I’ll give whatever you ask of me. Just give me the young woman as my wife!”
GEN 34:13 Jacob’s sons answered Shechem and his father Hamor deceitfully when they spoke because Shechem had violated their sister Dinah.
GEN 34:14 They said to them, “We cannot give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for it would be a disgrace to us.
GEN 34:15 We will give you our consent on this one condition: You must become like us by circumcising all your males.
GEN 34:16 Then we will give you our daughters to marry, and we will take your daughters as wives for ourselves, and we will live among you and become one people.
GEN 34:17 But if you do not agree to our terms by being circumcised, then we will take our sister and depart.”
GEN 34:18 Their offer pleased Hamor and his son Shechem.
GEN 34:19 The young man did not delay in doing what they asked because he wanted Jacob’s daughter Dinah badly. (Now he was more important than anyone in his father’s household.)
GEN 34:20 So Hamor and his son Shechem went to the gate of their city and spoke to the men of their city,
GEN 34:21 “These men are at peace with us. So let them live in the land and travel freely in it, for the land is wide enough for them. We will take their daughters for wives, and we will give them our daughters to marry.
GEN 34:22 Only on this one condition will these men consent to live with us and become one people: They demand that every male among us be circumcised just as they are circumcised.
GEN 34:23 If we do so, won’t their livestock, their property, and all their animals become ours? So let’s consent to their demand, so they will live among us.”
GEN 34:24 All the men who assembled at the city gate agreed with Hamor and his son Shechem. Every male who assembled at the city gate was circumcised.
GEN 34:25 In three days, when they were still in pain, two of Jacob’s sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brothers, each took his sword and went to the unsuspecting city and slaughtered every male.
GEN 34:26 They killed Hamor and his son Shechem with the sword, took Dinah from Shechem’s house, and left.
GEN 34:27 Jacob’s sons killed them and looted the city because their sister had been violated.
GEN 34:28 They took their flocks, herds, and donkeys, as well as everything in the city and in the surrounding fields.
GEN 34:29 They captured as plunder all their wealth, all their little ones, and their wives, including everything in the houses.
GEN 34:30 Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, “You have brought ruin on me by making me a foul odor among the inhabitants of the land – among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. I am few in number; they will join forces against me and attack me, and both I and my family will be destroyed!”
GEN 34:31 But Simeon and Levi replied, “Should he treat our sister like a common prostitute?”
GEN 35:1 Then God said to Jacob, “Go up at once to Bethel and live there. Make an altar there to God, who appeared to you when you fled from your brother Esau.”
GEN 35:2 So Jacob told his household and all who were with him, “Get rid of the foreign gods you have among you. Purify yourselves and change your clothes.
GEN 35:3 Let us go up at once to Bethel. Then I will make an altar there to God, who responded to me in my time of distress and has been with me wherever I went.”
GEN 35:4 So they gave Jacob all the foreign gods that were in their possession and the rings that were in their ears. Jacob buried them under the oak near Shechem
GEN 35:5 and they started on their journey. The surrounding cities were afraid of God, and they did not pursue the sons of Jacob.
GEN 35:6 Jacob and all those who were with him arrived at Luz (that is, Bethel) in the land of Canaan.
GEN 35:7 He built an altar there and named the place El Bethel because there God had revealed himself to him when he was fleeing from his brother.
GEN 35:8 (Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, died and was buried under the oak below Bethel; thus it was named Oak of Weeping.)
GEN 35:9 God appeared to Jacob again after he returned from Paddan Aram and blessed him.
GEN 35:10 God said to him, “Your name is Jacob, but your name will no longer be called Jacob; Israel will be your name.” So God named him Israel.
GEN 35:11 Then God said to him, “I am the sovereign God. Be fruitful and multiply! A nation – even a company of nations – will descend from you; kings will be among your descendants!
GEN 35:12 The land I gave to Abraham and Isaac I will give to you. To your descendants I will also give this land.”
GEN 35:13 Then God went up from the place where he spoke with him.
GEN 35:14 So Jacob set up a sacred stone pillar in the place where God spoke with him. He poured out a drink offering on it, and then he poured oil on it.
GEN 35:15 Jacob named the place where God spoke with him Bethel.
GEN 35:16 They traveled on from Bethel, and when Ephrath was still some distance away, Rachel went into labor – and her labor was hard.
GEN 35:17 When her labor was at its hardest, the midwife said to her, “Don’t be afraid, for you are having another son.”
GEN 35:18 With her dying breath, she named him Ben-Oni. But his father called him Benjamin instead.
GEN 35:19 So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem).
GEN 35:20 Jacob set up a marker over her grave; it is the Marker of Rachel’s Grave to this day.
GEN 35:21 Then Israel traveled on and pitched his tent beyond Migdal Eder.
GEN 35:22 While Israel was living in that land, Reuben had sexual relations with Bilhah, his father’s concubine, and Israel heard about it. Jacob had twelve sons:
GEN 35:23 The sons of Leah were Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, as well as Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun.
GEN 35:24 The sons of Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.
GEN 35:25 The sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s servant, were Dan and Naphtali.
GEN 35:26 The sons of Zilpah, Leah’s servant, were Gad and Asher. These were the sons of Jacob who were born to him in Paddan Aram.
GEN 35:27 So Jacob came back to his father Isaac in Mamre, to Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac had stayed.
GEN 35:28 Isaac lived to be 180 years old.
GEN 35:29 Then Isaac breathed his last and joined his ancestors. He died an old man who had lived a full life. His sons Esau and Jacob buried him.
GEN 36:1 What follows is the account of Esau (also known as Edom).
GEN 36:2 Esau took his wives from the Canaanites: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah and granddaughter of Zibeon the Hivite,
GEN 36:3 in addition to Basemath the daughter of Ishmael and sister of Nebaioth.
GEN 36:4 Adah bore Eliphaz to Esau, Basemath bore Reuel,
GEN 36:5 and Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. These were the sons of Esau who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
GEN 36:6 Esau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the people in his household, his livestock, his animals, and all his possessions which he had acquired in the land of Canaan and went to a land some distance away from Jacob his brother
GEN 36:7 because they had too many possessions to be able to stay together and the land where they had settled was not able to support them because of their livestock.
GEN 36:8 So Esau (also known as Edom) lived in the hill country of Seir.
GEN 36:9 This is the account of Esau, the father of the Edomites, in the hill country of Seir.
GEN 36:10 These were the names of Esau’s sons: Eliphaz, the son of Esau’s wife Adah, and Reuel, the son of Esau’s wife Basemath.
GEN 36:11 The sons of Eliphaz were: Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz.
GEN 36:12 Timna, a concubine of Esau’s son Eliphaz, bore Amalek to Eliphaz. These were the sons of Esau’s wife Adah.
GEN 36:13 These were the sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. These were the sons of Esau’s wife Basemath.
GEN 36:14 These were the sons of Esau’s wife Oholibamah the daughter of Anah and granddaughter of Zibeon: She bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah to Esau.
GEN 36:15 These were the chiefs among the descendants of Esau, the sons of Eliphaz, Esau’s firstborn: chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
GEN 36:16 chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek. These were the chiefs descended from Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.
GEN 36:17 These were the sons of Esau’s son Reuel: chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah. These were the chiefs descended from Reuel in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Esau’s wife Basemath.
GEN 36:18 These were the sons of Esau’s wife Oholibamah: chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah. These were the chiefs descended from Esau’s wife Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah.
GEN 36:19 These were the sons of Esau (also known as Edom), and these were their chiefs.
GEN 36:20 These were the sons of Seir the Horite, who were living in the land: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,
GEN 36:21 Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. These were the chiefs of the Horites, the descendants of Seir in the land of Edom.
GEN 36:22 The sons of Lotan were Hori and Homam; Lotan’s sister was Timna.
GEN 36:23 These were the sons of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
GEN 36:24 These were the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah (who discovered the hot springs in the wilderness as he pastured the donkeys of his father Zibeon).
GEN 36:25 These were the children of Anah: Dishon and Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah.
GEN 36:26 These were the sons of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Keran.
GEN 36:27 These were the sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan.
GEN 36:28 These were the sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
GEN 36:29 These were the chiefs of the Horites: chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,
GEN 36:30 chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan. These were the chiefs of the Horites, according to their chief lists in the land of Seir.
GEN 36:31 These were the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king ruled over the Israelites:
GEN 36:32 Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom; the name of his city was Dinhabah.
GEN 36:33 When Bela died, Jobab the son of Zerah from Bozrah reigned in his place.
GEN 36:34 When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites reigned in his place.
GEN 36:35 When Husham died, Hadad the son of Bedad, who defeated the Midianites in the land of Moab, reigned in his place; the name of his city was Avith.
GEN 36:36 When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah reigned in his place.
GEN 36:37 When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth by the River reigned in his place.
GEN 36:38 When Shaul died, Baal-Hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his place.
GEN 36:39 When Baal-Hanan the son of Achbor died, Hadad reigned in his place; the name of his city was Pau. His wife’s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-Zahab.
GEN 36:40 These were the names of the chiefs of Esau, according to their families, according to their places, by their names: chief Timna, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,
GEN 36:41 chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
GEN 36:42 chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
GEN 36:43 chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These were the chiefs of Edom, according to their settlements in the land they possessed. This was Esau, the father of the Edomites.
GEN 37:1 But Jacob lived in the land where his father had stayed, in the land of Canaan.
GEN 37:2 This is the account of Jacob. Joseph, his seventeen-year-old son, was taking care of the flocks with his brothers. Now he was a youngster working with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father’s wives. Joseph brought back a bad report about them to their father.
GEN 37:3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons because he was a son born to him late in life, and he made a special tunic for him.
GEN 37:4 When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father loved him more than any of them, they hated Joseph and were not able to speak to him kindly.
GEN 37:5 Joseph had a dream, and when he told his brothers about it, they hated him even more.
GEN 37:6 He said to them, “Listen to this dream I had:
GEN 37:7 There we were, binding sheaves of grain in the middle of the field. Suddenly my sheaf rose up and stood upright and your sheaves surrounded my sheaf and bowed down to it!”
GEN 37:8 Then his brothers asked him, “Do you really think you will rule over us or have dominion over us?” They hated him even more because of his dream and because of what he said.
GEN 37:9 Then he had another dream, and told it to his brothers. “Look,” he said. “I had another dream. The sun, the moon, and eleven stars were bowing down to me.”
GEN 37:10 When he told his father and his brothers, his father rebuked him, saying, “What is this dream that you had? Will I, your mother, and your brothers really come and bow down to you?”
GEN 37:11 His brothers were jealous of him, but his father kept in mind what Joseph said.
GEN 37:12 When his brothers had gone to graze their father’s flocks near Shechem,
GEN 37:13 Israel said to Joseph, “Your brothers are grazing the flocks near Shechem. Come, I will send you to them.” “I’m ready,” Joseph replied.
GEN 37:14 So Jacob said to him, “Go now and check on the welfare of your brothers and of the flocks, and bring me word.” So Jacob sent him from the valley of Hebron.
GEN 37:15 When Joseph reached Shechem, a man found him wandering in the field, so the man asked him, “What are you looking for?”
GEN 37:16 He replied, “I’m looking for my brothers. Please tell me where they are grazing their flocks.”
GEN 37:17 The man said, “They left this area, for I heard them say, ‘Let’s go to Dothan.’” So Joseph went after his brothers and found them at Dothan.
GEN 37:18 Now Joseph’s brothers saw him from a distance, and before he reached them, they plotted to kill him.
GEN 37:19 They said to one another, “Here comes this master of dreams!
GEN 37:20 Come now, let’s kill him, throw him into one of the cisterns, and then say that a wild animal ate him. Then we’ll see how his dreams turn out!”
GEN 37:21 When Reuben heard this, he rescued Joseph from their hands, saying, “Let’s not take his life!”
GEN 37:22 Reuben continued, “Don’t shed blood! Throw him into this cistern that is here in the wilderness, but don’t lay a hand on him.” (Reuben said this so he could rescue Joseph from them and take him back to his father.)
GEN 37:23 When Joseph reached his brothers, they stripped him of his tunic, the special tunic that he wore.
GEN 37:24 Then they took him and threw him into the cistern. (Now the cistern was empty; there was no water in it.)
GEN 37:25 When they sat down to eat their food, they looked up and saw a caravan of Ishmaelites coming from Gilead. Their camels were carrying spices, balm, and myrrh down to Egypt.
GEN 37:26 Then Judah said to his brothers, “What profit is there if we kill our brother and cover up his blood?
GEN 37:27 Come, let’s sell him to the Ishmaelites, but let’s not lay a hand on him, for after all, he is our brother, our own flesh.” His brothers agreed.
GEN 37:28 So when the Midianite merchants passed by, Joseph’s brothers pulled him out of the cistern and sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. The Ishmaelites then took Joseph to Egypt.
GEN 37:29 Later Reuben returned to the cistern to find that Joseph was not in it! He tore his clothes,
GEN 37:30 returned to his brothers, and said, “The boy isn’t there! And I, where can I go?”
GEN 37:31 So they took Joseph’s tunic, killed a young goat, and dipped the tunic in the blood.
GEN 37:32 Then they brought the special tunic to their father and said, “We found this. Determine now whether it is your son’s tunic or not.”
GEN 37:33 He recognized it and exclaimed, “It is my son’s tunic! A wild animal has eaten him! Joseph has surely been torn to pieces!”
GEN 37:34 Then Jacob tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and mourned for his son many days.
GEN 37:35 All his sons and daughters stood by him to console him, but he refused to be consoled. “No,” he said, “I will go to the grave mourning my son.” So Joseph’s father wept for him.
GEN 37:36 Now in Egypt the Midianites sold Joseph to Potiphar, one of Pharaoh’s officials, the captain of the guard.
GEN 38:1 At that time Judah left his brothers and stayed with an Adullamite man named Hirah.
GEN 38:2 There Judah saw the daughter of a Canaanite man named Shua. Judah acquired her as a wife and had marital relations with her.
GEN 38:3 She became pregnant and had a son. Judah named him Er.
GEN 38:4 She became pregnant again and had another son, whom she named Onan.
GEN 38:5 Then she had yet another son, whom she named Shelah. She gave birth to him in Kezib.
GEN 38:6 Judah acquired a wife for Er his firstborn; her name was Tamar.
GEN 38:7 But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was evil in the Lord’s sight, so the Lord killed him.
GEN 38:8 Then Judah said to Onan, “Have sexual relations with your brother’s wife and fulfill the duty of a brother-in-law to her so that you may raise up a descendant for your brother.”
GEN 38:9 But Onan knew that the child would not be considered his. So whenever he had sexual relations with his brother’s wife, he withdrew prematurely so as not to give his brother a descendant.
GEN 38:10 What he did was evil in the Lord’s sight, so the Lord killed him too.
GEN 38:11 Then Judah said to his daughter-in-law Tamar, “Live as a widow in your father’s house until Shelah my son grows up.” For he thought, “I don’t want him to die like his brothers.” So Tamar went and lived in her father’s house.
GEN 38:12 After some time Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shua, died. After Judah was consoled, he left for Timnah to visit his sheepshearers, along with his friend Hirah the Adullamite.
GEN 38:13 Tamar was told, “Look, your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.”
GEN 38:14 So she removed her widow’s clothes and covered herself with a veil. She wrapped herself and sat at the entrance to Enaim which is on the way to Timnah. (She did this because she saw that she had not been given to Shelah as a wife, even though he had now grown up.)
GEN 38:15 When Judah saw her, he thought she was a prostitute because she had covered her face.
GEN 38:16 He turned aside to her along the road and said, “Come on! I want to have sex with you.” (He did not realize it was his daughter-in-law.) She asked, “What will you give me in exchange for having sex with you?”
GEN 38:17 He replied, “I’ll send you a young goat from the flock.” She asked, “Will you give me a pledge until you send it?”
GEN 38:18 He said, “What pledge should I give you?” She replied, “Your seal, your cord, and the staff that’s in your hand.” So he gave them to her and had sex with her. She became pregnant by him.
GEN 38:19 She left immediately, removed her veil, and put on her widow’s clothes.
GEN 38:20 Then Judah had his friend Hirah the Adullamite take a young goat to get back from the woman the items he had given in pledge, but Hirah could not find her.
GEN 38:21 He asked the men who were there, “Where is the cult prostitute who was at Enaim by the road?” But they replied, “There has been no cult prostitute here.”
GEN 38:22 So he returned to Judah and said, “I couldn’t find her. Moreover, the men of the place said, ‘There has been no cult prostitute here.’”
GEN 38:23 Judah said, “Let her keep the things for herself. Otherwise we will appear to be dishonest. I did indeed send this young goat, but you couldn’t find her.”
GEN 38:24 After three months Judah was told, “Your daughter-in-law Tamar has turned to prostitution, and as a result she has become pregnant.” Judah said, “Bring her out and let her be burned!”
GEN 38:25 While they were bringing her out, she sent word to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.” Then she said, “Identify the one to whom the seal, cord, and staff belong.”
GEN 38:26 Judah recognized them and said, “She is more upright than I am, because I wouldn’t give her to Shelah my son.” He did not have sexual relations with her again.
GEN 38:27 When it was time for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb.
GEN 38:28 While she was giving birth, one child put out his hand, and the midwife took a scarlet thread and tied it on his hand, saying, “This one came out first.”
GEN 38:29 But then he drew back his hand, and his brother came out before him. She said, “How you have broken out of the womb!” So he was named Perez.
GEN 38:30 Afterward his brother came out – the one who had the scarlet thread on his hand – and he was named Zerah.
GEN 39:1 Now Joseph had been brought down to Egypt. An Egyptian named Potiphar, an official of Pharaoh and the captain of the guard, purchased him from the Ishmaelites who had brought him there.
GEN 39:2 The Lord was with Joseph. He was successful and lived in the household of his Egyptian master.
GEN 39:3 His master observed that the Lord was with him and that the Lord made everything he was doing successful.
GEN 39:4 So Joseph found favor in his sight and became his personal attendant. Potiphar appointed Joseph overseer of his household and put him in charge of everything he owned.
GEN 39:5 From the time Potiphar appointed him over his household and over all that he owned, the Lord blessed the Egyptian’s household for Joseph’s sake. The blessing of the Lord was on everything that he had, both in his house and in his fields.
GEN 39:6 So Potiphar left everything he had in Joseph’s care; he gave no thought to anything except the food he ate. Now Joseph was well built and good-looking.
GEN 39:7 Soon after these things, his master’s wife took notice of Joseph and said, “Have sex with me.”
GEN 39:8 But he refused, saying to his master’s wife, “Look, my master does not give any thought to his household with me here, and everything that he owns he has put into my care.
GEN 39:9 There is no one greater in this household than I am. He has withheld nothing from me except you because you are his wife. So how could I do such a great evil and sin against God?”
GEN 39:10 Even though she continued to speak to Joseph day after day, he did not respond to her invitation to have sex with her.
GEN 39:11 One day he went into the house to do his work when none of the household servants were there in the house.
GEN 39:12 She grabbed him by his outer garment, saying, “Have sex with me!” But he left his outer garment in her hand and ran outside.
GEN 39:13 When she saw that he had left his outer garment in her hand and had run outside,
GEN 39:14 she called for her household servants and said to them, “See, my husband brought in a Hebrew man to us to humiliate us. He tried to have sex with me, but I screamed loudly.
GEN 39:15 When he heard me raise my voice and scream, he left his outer garment beside me and ran outside.”
GEN 39:16 So she laid his outer garment beside her until his master came home.
GEN 39:17 This is what she said to him: “That Hebrew slave you brought to us tried to humiliate me,
GEN 39:18 but when I raised my voice and screamed, he left his outer garment and ran outside.”
GEN 39:19 When his master heard his wife say, “This is the way your slave treated me,” he became furious.
GEN 39:20 Joseph’s master took him and threw him into the prison, the place where the king’s prisoners were confined. So he was there in the prison.
GEN 39:21 But the Lord was with Joseph and showed him kindness. He granted him favor in the sight of the prison warden.
GEN 39:22 The warden put all the prisoners under Joseph’s care. He was in charge of whatever they were doing.
GEN 39:23 The warden did not concern himself with anything that was in Joseph’s care because the Lord was with him and whatever he was doing the Lord was making successful.
GEN 40:1 After these things happened, the cupbearer to the king of Egypt and the royal baker offended their master, the king of Egypt.
GEN 40:2 Pharaoh was enraged with his two officials, the cupbearer and the baker,
GEN 40:3 so he imprisoned them in the house of the captain of the guard in the same facility where Joseph was confined.
GEN 40:4 The captain of the guard appointed Joseph to be their attendant, and he served them. They spent some time in custody.
GEN 40:5 Both of them, the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, had a dream the same night. Each man’s dream had its own meaning.
GEN 40:6 When Joseph came to them in the morning, he saw that they were looking depressed.
GEN 40:7 So he asked Pharaoh’s officials, who were with him in custody in his master’s house, “Why do you look so sad today?”
GEN 40:8 They told him, “We both had dreams, but there is no one to interpret them.” Joseph responded, “Don’t interpretations belong to God? Tell them to me.”
GEN 40:9 So the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph: “In my dream, there was a vine in front of me.
GEN 40:10 On the vine there were three branches. As it budded, its blossoms opened and its clusters ripened into grapes.
GEN 40:11 Now Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand, so I took the grapes, squeezed them into his cup, and put the cup in Pharaoh’s hand.”
GEN 40:12 “This is its meaning,” Joseph said to him. “The three branches represent three days.
GEN 40:13 In three more days Pharaoh will reinstate you and restore you to your office. You will put Pharaoh’s cup in his hand, just as you did before when you were cupbearer.
GEN 40:14 But remember me when it goes well for you, and show me kindness. Make mention of me to Pharaoh and bring me out of this prison,
GEN 40:15 for I really was kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews and I have done nothing wrong here for which they should put me in a dungeon.”
GEN 40:16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation of the first dream was favorable, he said to Joseph, “I also appeared in my dream and there were three baskets of white bread on my head.
GEN 40:17 In the top basket there were baked goods of every kind for Pharaoh, but the birds were eating them from the basket that was on my head.”
GEN 40:18 Joseph replied, “This is its meaning: The three baskets represent three days.
GEN 40:19 In three more days Pharaoh will decapitate you and impale you on a pole. Then the birds will eat your flesh from you.”
GEN 40:20 On the third day it was Pharaoh’s birthday, so he gave a feast for all his servants. He “lifted up” the head of the chief cupbearer and the head of the chief baker in the midst of his servants.
GEN 40:21 He restored the chief cupbearer to his former position so that he placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand,
GEN 40:22 but the chief baker he impaled, just as Joseph had predicted.
GEN 40:23 But the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph – he forgot him.
GEN 41:1 At the end of two full years Pharaoh had a dream. As he was standing by the Nile,
GEN 41:2 seven fine-looking, fat cows were coming up out of the Nile, and they grazed in the reeds.
GEN 41:3 Then seven bad-looking, thin cows were coming up after them from the Nile, and they stood beside the other cows at the edge of the river.
GEN 41:4 The bad-looking, thin cows ate the seven fine-looking, fat cows. Then Pharaoh woke up.
GEN 41:5 Then he fell asleep again and had a second dream: There were seven heads of grain growing on one stalk, healthy and good.
GEN 41:6 Then seven heads of grain, thin and burned by the east wind, were sprouting up after them.
GEN 41:7 The thin heads swallowed up the seven healthy and full heads. Then Pharaoh woke up and realized it was a dream.
GEN 41:8 In the morning he was troubled, so he called for all the diviner-priests of Egypt and all its wise men. Pharaoh told them his dreams, but no one could interpret them for him.
GEN 41:9 Then the chief cupbearer said to Pharaoh, “Today I recall my failures.
GEN 41:10 Pharaoh was enraged with his servants, and he put me in prison in the house of the captain of the guards – me and the chief baker.
GEN 41:11 We each had a dream one night; each of us had a dream with its own meaning.
GEN 41:12 Now a young man, a Hebrew, a servant of the captain of the guards, was with us there. We told him our dreams, and he interpreted the meaning of each of our respective dreams for us.
GEN 41:13 It happened just as he had said to us – Pharaoh restored me to my office, but he impaled the baker.”
GEN 41:14 Then Pharaoh summoned Joseph. So they brought him quickly out of the dungeon; he shaved himself, changed his clothes, and came before Pharaoh.
GEN 41:15 Pharaoh said to Joseph, “I had a dream, and there is no one who can interpret it. But I have heard about you, that you can interpret dreams.”
GEN 41:16 Joseph replied to Pharaoh, “It is not within my power, but God will speak concerning the welfare of Pharaoh.”
GEN 41:17 Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “In my dream I was standing by the edge of the Nile.
GEN 41:18 Then seven fat and fine-looking cows were coming up out of the Nile, and they grazed in the reeds.
GEN 41:19 Then seven other cows came up after them; they were scrawny, very bad-looking, and lean. I had never seen such bad-looking cows as these in all the land of Egypt!
GEN 41:20 The lean, bad-looking cows ate up the seven fat cows.
GEN 41:21 When they had eaten them, no one would have known that they had done so, for they were just as bad-looking as before. Then I woke up.
GEN 41:22 I also saw in my dream seven heads of grain growing on one stalk, full and good.
GEN 41:23 Then seven heads of grain, withered and thin and burned with the east wind, were sprouting up after them.
GEN 41:24 The thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven good heads of grain. So I told all this to the diviner-priests, but no one could tell me its meaning.”
GEN 41:25 Then Joseph said to Pharaoh, “Both dreams of Pharaoh have the same meaning. God has revealed to Pharaoh what he is about to do.
GEN 41:26 The seven good cows represent seven years, and the seven good heads of grain represent seven years. Both dreams have the same meaning.
GEN 41:27 The seven lean, bad-looking cows that came up after them represent seven years, as do the seven empty heads of grain burned with the east wind. They represent seven years of famine.
GEN 41:28 This is just what I told Pharaoh: God has shown Pharaoh what he is about to do.
GEN 41:29 Seven years of great abundance are coming throughout the whole land of Egypt.
GEN 41:30 But seven years of famine will occur after them, and all the abundance will be forgotten in the land of Egypt. The famine will devastate the land.
GEN 41:31 The previous abundance of the land will not be remembered because of the famine that follows, for the famine will be very severe.
GEN 41:32 The dream was repeated to Pharaoh because the matter has been decreed by God, and God will make it happen soon.
GEN 41:33 “So now Pharaoh should look for a wise and discerning man and give him authority over all the land of Egypt.
GEN 41:34 Pharaoh should do this – he should appoint officials throughout the land to collect one-fifth of the produce of the land of Egypt during the seven years of abundance.
GEN 41:35 They should gather all the excess food during these good years that are coming. By Pharaoh’s authority they should store up grain so the cities will have food, and they should preserve it.
GEN 41:36 This food should be held in storage for the land in preparation for the seven years of famine that will occur throughout the land of Egypt. In this way the land will survive the famine.”
GEN 41:37 This advice made sense to Pharaoh and all his officials.
GEN 41:38 So Pharaoh asked his officials, “Can we find a man like Joseph, one in whom the Spirit of God is present?”
GEN 41:39 So Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Because God has enabled you to know all this, there is no one as wise and discerning as you are!
GEN 41:40 You will oversee my household, and all my people will submit to your commands. Only I, the king, will be greater than you.
GEN 41:41 “See here,” Pharaoh said to Joseph, “I place you in authority over all the land of Egypt.”
GEN 41:42 Then Pharaoh took his signet ring from his own hand and put it on Joseph’s. He clothed him with fine linen clothes and put a gold chain around his neck.
GEN 41:43 Pharaoh had him ride in the chariot used by his second-in-command, and they cried out before him, “Kneel down!” So he placed him over all the land of Egypt.
GEN 41:44 Pharaoh also said to Joseph, “I am Pharaoh, but without your permission no one will move his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt.”
GEN 41:45 Pharaoh gave Joseph the name Zaphenath-Paneah. He also gave him Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, to be his wife. So Joseph took charge of all the land of Egypt.
GEN 41:46 Now Joseph was 30 years old when he began serving Pharaoh king of Egypt. Joseph was commissioned by Pharaoh and was in charge of all the land of Egypt.
GEN 41:47 During the seven years of abundance the land produced large, bountiful harvests.
GEN 41:48 Joseph collected all the excess food in the land of Egypt during the seven years and stored it in the cities. In every city he put the food gathered from the fields around it.
GEN 41:49 Joseph stored up a vast amount of grain, like the sand of the sea, until he stopped measuring it because it was impossible to measure.
GEN 41:50 Two sons were born to Joseph before the famine came. Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, was their mother.
GEN 41:51 Joseph named the firstborn Manasseh, saying, “Certainly God has made me forget all my trouble and all my father’s house.”
GEN 41:52 He named the second child Ephraim, saying, “Certainly God has made me fruitful in the land of my suffering.”
GEN 41:53 The seven years of abundance in the land of Egypt came to an end.
GEN 41:54 Then the seven years of famine began, just as Joseph had predicted. There was famine in all the other lands, but throughout the land of Egypt there was food.
GEN 41:55 When all the land of Egypt experienced the famine, the people cried out to Pharaoh for food. Pharaoh said to all the people of Egypt, “Go to Joseph and do whatever he tells you.”
GEN 41:56 While the famine was over all the earth, Joseph opened the storehouses and sold grain to the Egyptians. The famine was severe throughout the land of Egypt.
GEN 41:57 People from every country came to Joseph in Egypt to buy grain because the famine was severe throughout the earth.
GEN 42:1 When Jacob heard there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons, “Why are you looking at each other?”
GEN 42:2 He then said, “Look, I hear that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy grain for us so that we may live and not die.”
GEN 42:3 So ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
GEN 42:4 But Jacob did not send Joseph’s brother Benjamin with his brothers, for he said, “What if some accident happens to him?”
GEN 42:5 So Israel’s sons came to buy grain among the other travelers, for the famine was severe in the land of Canaan.
GEN 42:6 Now Joseph was the ruler of the country, the one who sold grain to all the people of the country. Joseph’s brothers came and bowed down before him with their faces to the ground.
GEN 42:7 When Joseph saw his brothers, he recognized them, but he pretended to be a stranger to them and spoke to them harshly. He asked, “Where do you come from?” They answered, “From the land of Canaan, to buy grain for food.”
GEN 42:8 Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him.
GEN 42:9 Then Joseph remembered the dreams he had dreamed about them, and he said to them, “You are spies; you have come to see if our land is vulnerable!”
GEN 42:10 But they exclaimed, “No, my lord! Your servants have come to buy grain for food!
GEN 42:11 We are all the sons of one man; we are honest men! Your servants are not spies.”
GEN 42:12 “No,” he insisted, “but you have come to see if our land is vulnerable.”
GEN 42:13 They replied, “Your servants are from a family of twelve brothers. We are the sons of one man in the land of Canaan. The youngest is with our father at this time, and one is no longer alive.”
GEN 42:14 But Joseph told them, “It is just as I said to you: You are spies!
GEN 42:15 You will be tested in this way: As surely as Pharaoh lives, you will not depart from this place unless your youngest brother comes here.
GEN 42:16 One of you must go and get your brother, while the rest of you remain in prison. In this way your words may be tested to see if you are telling the truth. If not, then, as surely as Pharaoh lives, you are spies!”
GEN 42:17 He imprisoned them all for three days.
GEN 42:18 On the third day Joseph said to them, “Do as I say and you will live, for I fear God.
GEN 42:19 If you are honest men, leave one of your brothers confined here in prison while the rest of you go and take grain back for your hungry families.
GEN 42:20 But you must bring your youngest brother to me. Then your words will be verified and you will not die.” They did as he said.
GEN 42:21 They said to one other, “Surely we’re being punished because of our brother, because we saw how distressed he was when he cried to us for mercy, but we refused to listen. That is why this distress has come on us!”
GEN 42:22 Reuben said to them, “Didn’t I say to you, ‘Don’t sin against the boy,’ but you wouldn’t listen? So now we must pay for shedding his blood!”
GEN 42:23 (Now they did not know that Joseph could understand them, for he was speaking through an interpreter.)
GEN 42:24 He turned away from them and wept. When he turned around and spoke to them again, he had Simeon taken from them and tied up before their eyes.
GEN 42:25 Then Joseph gave orders to fill their bags with grain, to return each man’s money to his sack, and to give them provisions for the journey. His orders were carried out.
GEN 42:26 So they loaded their grain on their donkeys and left.
GEN 42:27 When one of them opened his sack to get feed for his donkey at their resting place, he saw his money in the mouth of his sack.
GEN 42:28 He said to his brothers, “My money was returned! Here it is in my sack!” They were dismayed; they turned trembling one to another and said, “What in the world has God done to us?”
GEN 42:29 They returned to their father Jacob in the land of Canaan and told him all the things that had happened to them, saying,
GEN 42:30 “The man, the lord of the land, spoke harshly to us and treated us as if we were spying on the land.
GEN 42:31 But we said to him, ‘We are honest men; we are not spies!
GEN 42:32 We are from a family of twelve brothers; we are the sons of one father. One is no longer alive, and the youngest is with our father at this time in the land of Canaan.’
GEN 42:33 “Then the man, the lord of the land, said to us, ‘This is how I will find out if you are honest men. Leave one of your brothers with me, and take grain for your hungry households and go.
GEN 42:34 But bring your youngest brother back to me so I will know that you are honest men and not spies. Then I will give your brother back to you and you may move about freely in the land.’”
GEN 42:35 When they were emptying their sacks, there was each man’s bag of money in his sack! When they and their father saw the bags of money, they were afraid.
GEN 42:36 Their father Jacob said to them, “You are making me childless! Joseph is gone. Simeon is gone. And now you want to take Benjamin! Everything is against me.”
GEN 42:37 Then Reuben said to his father, “You may put my two sons to death if I do not bring him back to you. Put him in my care and I will bring him back to you.”
GEN 42:38 But Jacob replied, “My son will not go down there with you, for his brother is dead and he alone is left. If an accident happens to him on the journey you have to make, then you will bring down my gray hair in sorrow to the grave.”
GEN 43:1 Now the famine was severe in the land.
GEN 43:2 When they finished eating the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them, “Return, buy us a little more food.”
GEN 43:3 But Judah said to him, “The man solemnly warned us, ‘You will not see my face unless your brother is with you.’
GEN 43:4 If you send our brother with us, we’ll go down and buy food for you.
GEN 43:5 But if you will not send him, we won’t go down there because the man said to us, ‘You will not see my face unless your brother is with you.’”
GEN 43:6 Israel said, “Why did you bring this trouble on me by telling the man you had one more brother?”
GEN 43:7 They replied, “The man questioned us thoroughly about ourselves and our family, saying, ‘Is your father still alive? Do you have another brother?’ So we answered him in this way. How could we possibly know that he would say, ‘Bring your brother down’?”
GEN 43:8 Then Judah said to his father Israel, “Send the boy with me and we will go immediately. Then we will live and not die – we and you and our little ones.
GEN 43:9 I myself pledge security for him; you may hold me liable. If I do not bring him back to you and place him here before you, I will bear the blame before you all my life.
GEN 43:10 But if we had not delayed, we could have traveled there and back twice by now!”
GEN 43:11 Then their father Israel said to them, “If it must be so, then do this: Take some of the best products of the land in your bags, and take a gift down to the man – a little balm and a little honey, spices and myrrh, pistachios and almonds.
GEN 43:12 Take double the money with you; you must take back the money that was returned in the mouths of your sacks – perhaps it was an oversight.
GEN 43:13 Take your brother too, and go right away to the man.
GEN 43:14 May the sovereign God grant you mercy before the man so that he may release your other brother and Benjamin! As for me, if I lose my children I lose them.”
GEN 43:15 So the men took these gifts, and they took double the money with them, along with Benjamin. Then they hurried down to Egypt and stood before Joseph.
GEN 43:16 When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the servant who was over his household, “Bring the men to the house. Slaughter an animal and prepare it, for the men will eat with me at noon.”
GEN 43:17 The man did just as Joseph said; he brought the men into Joseph’s house.
GEN 43:18 But the men were afraid when they were brought to Joseph’s house. They said, “We are being brought in because of the money that was returned in our sacks last time. He wants to capture us, make us slaves, and take our donkeys!”
GEN 43:19 So they approached the man who was in charge of Joseph’s household and spoke to him at the entrance to the house.
GEN 43:20 They said, “My lord, we did indeed come down the first time to buy food.
GEN 43:21 But when we came to the place where we spent the night, we opened our sacks and each of us found his money – the full amount – in the mouth of his sack. So we have returned it.
GEN 43:22 We have brought additional money with us to buy food. We do not know who put the money in our sacks!”
GEN 43:23 “Everything is fine,” the man in charge of Joseph’s household told them. “Don’t be afraid. Your God and the God of your father has given you treasure in your sacks. I had your money.” Then he brought Simeon out to them.
GEN 43:24 The servant in charge brought the men into Joseph’s house. He gave them water, and they washed their feet. Then he gave food to their donkeys.
GEN 43:25 They got their gifts ready for Joseph’s arrival at noon, for they had heard that they were to have a meal there.
GEN 43:26 When Joseph came home, they presented him with the gifts they had brought inside, and they bowed down to the ground before him.
GEN 43:27 He asked them how they were doing. Then he said, “Is your aging father well, the one you spoke about? Is he still alive?”
GEN 43:28 “Your servant our father is well,” they replied. “He is still alive.” They bowed down in humility.
GEN 43:29 When Joseph looked up and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother’s son, he said, “Is this your youngest brother, whom you told me about?” Then he said, “May God be gracious to you, my son.”
GEN 43:30 Joseph hurried out, for he was overcome by affection for his brother and was at the point of tears. So he went to his room and wept there.
GEN 43:31 Then he washed his face and came out. With composure he said, “Set out the food.”
GEN 43:32 They set a place for him, a separate place for his brothers, and another for the Egyptians who were eating with him. (The Egyptians are not able to eat with Hebrews, for the Egyptians think it is disgusting to do so.)
GEN 43:33 They sat before him, arranged by order of birth, beginning with the firstborn and ending with the youngest. The men looked at each other in astonishment.
GEN 43:34 He gave them portions of the food set before him, but the portion for Benjamin was five times greater than the portions for any of the others. They drank with Joseph until they all became drunk.
GEN 44:1 He instructed the servant who was over his household, “Fill the sacks of the men with as much food as they can carry and put each man’s money in the mouth of his sack.
GEN 44:2 Then put my cup – the silver cup – in the mouth of the youngest one’s sack, along with the money for his grain.” He did as Joseph instructed.
GEN 44:3 When morning came, the men and their donkeys were sent off.
GEN 44:4 They had not gone very far from the city when Joseph said to the servant who was over his household, “Pursue the men at once! When you overtake them, say to them, ‘Why have you repaid good with evil?
GEN 44:5 Doesn’t my master drink from this cup and use it for divination? You have done wrong!’”
GEN 44:6 When the man overtook them, he spoke these words to them.
GEN 44:7 They answered him, “Why does my lord say such things? Far be it from your servants to do such a thing!
GEN 44:8 Look, the money that we found in the mouths of our sacks we brought back to you from the land of Canaan. Why then would we steal silver or gold from your master’s house?
GEN 44:9 If one of us has it, he will die, and the rest of us will become my lord’s slaves!”
GEN 44:10 He replied, “You have suggested your own punishment! The one who has it will become my slave, but the rest of you will go free.”
GEN 44:11 So each man quickly lowered his sack to the ground and opened it.
GEN 44:12 Then the man searched. He began with the oldest and finished with the youngest. The cup was found in Benjamin’s sack!
GEN 44:13 They all tore their clothes! Then each man loaded his donkey, and they returned to the city.
GEN 44:14 So Judah and his brothers came back to Joseph’s house. He was still there, and they threw themselves to the ground before him.
GEN 44:15 Joseph said to them, “What did you think you were doing? Don’t you know that a man like me can find out things like this by divination?”
GEN 44:16 Judah replied, “What can we say to my lord? What can we speak? How can we clear ourselves? God has exposed the sin of your servants! We are now my lord’s slaves, we and the one in whose possession the cup was found.”
GEN 44:17 But Joseph said, “Far be it from me to do this! The man in whose hand the cup was found will become my slave, but the rest of you may go back to your father in peace.”
GEN 44:18 Then Judah approached him and said, “My lord, please allow your servant to speak a word with you. Please do not get angry with your servant, for you are just like Pharaoh.
GEN 44:19 My lord asked his servants, ‘Do you have a father or a brother?’
GEN 44:20 We said to my lord, ‘We have an aged father, and there is a young boy who was born when our father was old. The boy’s brother is dead. He is the only one of his mother’s sons left, and his father loves him.’
GEN 44:21 “Then you told your servants, ‘Bring him down to me so I can see him.’
GEN 44:22 We said to my lord, ‘The boy cannot leave his father. If he leaves his father, his father will die.’
GEN 44:23 But you said to your servants, ‘If your youngest brother does not come down with you, you will not see my face again.’
GEN 44:24 When we returned to your servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
GEN 44:25 “Then our father said, ‘Go back and buy us a little food.’
GEN 44:26 But we replied, ‘We cannot go down there. If our youngest brother is with us, then we will go, for we won’t be permitted to see the man’s face if our youngest brother is not with us.’
GEN 44:27 “Then your servant my father said to us, ‘You know that my wife gave me two sons.
GEN 44:28 The first disappeared and I said, “He has surely been torn to pieces.” I have not seen him since.
GEN 44:29 If you take this one from me too and an accident happens to him, then you will bring down my gray hair in tragedy to the grave.’
GEN 44:30 “So now, when I return to your servant my father, and the boy is not with us – his very life is bound up in his son’s life.
GEN 44:31 When he sees the boy is not with us, he will die, and your servants will bring down the gray hair of your servant our father in sorrow to the grave.
GEN 44:32 Indeed, your servant pledged security for the boy with my father, saying, ‘If I do not bring him back to you, then I will bear the blame before my father all my life.’
GEN 44:33 “So now, please let your servant remain as my lord’s slave instead of the boy. As for the boy, let him go back with his brothers.
GEN 44:34 For how can I go back to my father if the boy is not with me? I couldn’t bear to see my father’s pain.”
GEN 45:1 Joseph was no longer able to control himself before all his attendants, so he cried out, “Make everyone go out from my presence!” No one remained with Joseph when he made himself known to his brothers.
GEN 45:2 He wept loudly; the Egyptians heard it and Pharaoh’s household heard about it.
GEN 45:3 Joseph said to his brothers, “I am Joseph! Is my father still alive?” His brothers could not answer him because they were dumbfounded before him.
GEN 45:4 Joseph said to his brothers, “Come closer to me,” so they came near. Then he said, “I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt.
GEN 45:5 Now, do not be upset and do not be angry with yourselves because you sold me here, for God sent me ahead of you to preserve life!
GEN 45:6 For these past two years there has been famine in the land and for five more years there will be neither plowing nor harvesting.
GEN 45:7 God sent me ahead of you to preserve you on the earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
GEN 45:8 So now, it is not you who sent me here, but God. He has made me an adviser to Pharaoh, lord over all his household, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
GEN 45:9 Now go up to my father quickly and tell him, ‘This is what your son Joseph says: “God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come down to me; do not delay!
GEN 45:10 You will live in the land of Goshen, and you will be near me – you, your children, your grandchildren, your flocks, your herds, and everything you have.
GEN 45:11 I will provide you with food there because there will be five more years of famine. Otherwise you would become poor – you, your household, and everyone who belongs to you.”’
GEN 45:12 You and my brother Benjamin can certainly see with your own eyes that I really am the one who speaks to you.
GEN 45:13 So tell my father about all my honor in Egypt and about everything you have seen. But bring my father down here quickly!”
GEN 45:14 Then he threw himself on the neck of his brother Benjamin and wept, and Benjamin wept on his neck.
GEN 45:15 He kissed all his brothers and wept over them. After this his brothers talked with him.
GEN 45:16 Now it was reported in the household of Pharaoh, “Joseph’s brothers have arrived.” It pleased Pharaoh and his servants.
GEN 45:17 Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Say to your brothers, ‘Do this: Load your animals and go to the land of Canaan!
GEN 45:18 Get your father and your households and come to me! Then I will give you the best land in Egypt and you will eat the best of the land.’
GEN 45:19 You are also commanded to say, ‘Do this: Take for yourselves wagons from the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives. Bring your father and come.
GEN 45:20 Don’t worry about your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt will be yours.’”
GEN 45:21 So the sons of Israel did as he said. Joseph gave them wagons as Pharaoh had instructed, and he gave them provisions for the journey.
GEN 45:22 He gave sets of clothes to each one of them, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver and five sets of clothes.
GEN 45:23 To his father he sent the following: ten donkeys loaded with the best products of Egypt and ten female donkeys loaded with grain, food, and provisions for his father’s journey.
GEN 45:24 Then he sent his brothers on their way and they left. He said to them, “As you travel don’t be overcome with fear.”
GEN 45:25 So they went up from Egypt and came to their father Jacob in the land of Canaan.
GEN 45:26 They told him, “Joseph is still alive and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt!” Jacob was stunned, for he did not believe them.
GEN 45:27 But when they related to him everything Joseph had said to them, and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to transport him, their father Jacob’s spirit revived.
GEN 45:28 Then Israel said, “Enough! My son Joseph is still alive! I will go and see him before I die.”
GEN 46:1 So Israel began his journey, taking with him all that he had. When he came to Beer Sheba he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.
GEN 46:2 God spoke to Israel in a vision during the night and said, “Jacob, Jacob!” He replied, “Here I am!”
GEN 46:3 He said, “I am God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you into a great nation there.
GEN 46:4 I will go down with you to Egypt and I myself will certainly bring you back from there. Joseph will close your eyes.”
GEN 46:5 Then Jacob started out from Beer Sheba, and the sons of Israel carried their father Jacob, their little children, and their wives in the wagons that Pharaoh had sent along to transport him.
GEN 46:6 Jacob and all his descendants took their livestock and the possessions they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and they went to Egypt.
GEN 46:7 He brought with him to Egypt his sons and grandsons, his daughters and granddaughters – all his descendants.
GEN 46:8 These are the names of the sons of Israel who went to Egypt – Jacob and his sons: Reuben, the firstborn of Jacob.
GEN 46:9 The sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
GEN 46:10 The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jakin, Zohar, and Shaul (the son of a Canaanite woman).
GEN 46:11 The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
GEN 46:12 The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah (but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan). The sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.
GEN 46:13 The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron.
GEN 46:14 The sons of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel.
GEN 46:15 These were the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan Aram, along with Dinah his daughter. His sons and daughters numbered thirty-three in all.
GEN 46:16 The sons of Gad: Zephon, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli.
GEN 46:17 The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah their sister. The sons of Beriah were Heber and Malkiel.
GEN 46:18 These were the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter. She bore these to Jacob, sixteen in all.
GEN 46:19 The sons of Rachel the wife of Jacob: Joseph and Benjamin.
GEN 46:20 Manasseh and Ephraim were born to Joseph in the land of Egypt. Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bore them to him.
GEN 46:21 The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Beker, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim and Ard.
GEN 46:22 These were the sons of Rachel who were born to Jacob, fourteen in all.
GEN 46:23 The son of Dan: Hushim.
GEN 46:24 The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem.
GEN 46:25 These were the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel his daughter. She bore these to Jacob, seven in all.
GEN 46:26 All the direct descendants of Jacob who went to Egypt with him were sixty-six in number. (This number does not include the wives of Jacob’s sons.)
GEN 46:27 Counting the two sons of Joseph who were born to him in Egypt, all the people of the household of Jacob who were in Egypt numbered seventy.
GEN 46:28 Jacob sent Judah before him to Joseph to accompany him to Goshen. So they came to the land of Goshen.
GEN 46:29 Joseph harnessed his chariot and went up to meet his father Israel in Goshen. When he met him, he hugged his neck and wept on his neck for quite some time.
GEN 46:30 Israel said to Joseph, “Now let me die since I have seen your face and know that you are still alive.”
GEN 46:31 Then Joseph said to his brothers and his father’s household, “I will go up and tell Pharaoh, ‘My brothers and my father’s household who were in the land of Canaan have come to me.
GEN 46:32 The men are shepherds; they take care of livestock. They have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have.’
GEN 46:33 Pharaoh will summon you and say, ‘What is your occupation?’
GEN 46:34 Tell him, ‘Your servants have taken care of cattle from our youth until now, both we and our fathers,’ so that you may live in the land of Goshen, for everyone who takes care of sheep is disgusting to the Egyptians.”
GEN 47:1 Joseph went and told Pharaoh, “My father, my brothers, their flocks and herds, and all that they own have arrived from the land of Canaan. They are now in the land of Goshen.”
GEN 47:2 He took five of his brothers and introduced them to Pharaoh.
GEN 47:3 Pharaoh said to Joseph’s brothers, “What is your occupation?” They said to Pharaoh, “Your servants take care of flocks, just as our ancestors did.”
GEN 47:4 Then they said to Pharaoh, “We have come to live as temporary residents in the land. There is no pasture for your servants’ flocks because the famine is severe in the land of Canaan. So now, please let your servants live in the land of Goshen.”
GEN 47:5 Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Your father and your brothers have come to you.
GEN 47:6 The land of Egypt is before you; settle your father and your brothers in the best region of the land. They may live in the land of Goshen. If you know of any highly capable men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.”
GEN 47:7 Then Joseph brought in his father Jacob and presented him before Pharaoh. Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
GEN 47:8 Pharaoh said to Jacob, “How long have you lived?”
GEN 47:9 Jacob said to Pharaoh, “All the years of my travels are 130. All the years of my life have been few and painful; the years of my travels are not as long as those of my ancestors.”
GEN 47:10 Then Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from his presence.
GEN 47:11 So Joseph settled his father and his brothers. He gave them territory in the land of Egypt, in the best region of the land, the land of Rameses, just as Pharaoh had commanded.
GEN 47:12 Joseph also provided food for his father, his brothers, and all his father’s household, according to the number of their little children.
GEN 47:13 But there was no food in all the land because the famine was very severe; the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan wasted away because of the famine.
GEN 47:14 Joseph collected all the money that could be found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan as payment for the grain they were buying. Then Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s palace.
GEN 47:15 When the money from the lands of Egypt and Canaan was used up, all the Egyptians came to Joseph and said, “Give us food! Why should we die before your very eyes because our money has run out?”
GEN 47:16 Then Joseph said, “If your money is gone, bring your livestock, and I will give you food in exchange for your livestock.”
GEN 47:17 So they brought their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph gave them food in exchange for their horses, the livestock of their flocks and herds, and their donkeys. He got them through that year by giving them food in exchange for livestock.
GEN 47:18 When that year was over, they came to him the next year and said to him, “We cannot hide from our lord that the money is used up and the livestock and the animals belong to our lord. Nothing remains before our lord except our bodies and our land.
GEN 47:19 Why should we die before your very eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land in exchange for food, and we, with our land, will become Pharaoh’s slaves. Give us seed that we may live and not die. Then the land will not become desolate.”
GEN 47:20 So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh. Each of the Egyptians sold his field, for the famine was severe. So the land became Pharaoh’s.
GEN 47:21 Joseph made all the people slaves from one end of Egypt’s border to the other end of it.
GEN 47:22 But he did not purchase the land of the priests because the priests had an allotment from Pharaoh and they ate from their allotment that Pharaoh gave them. That is why they did not sell their land.
GEN 47:23 Joseph said to the people, “Since I have bought you and your land today for Pharaoh, here is seed for you. Cultivate the land.
GEN 47:24 When you gather in the crop, give one-fifth of it to Pharaoh, and the rest will be yours for seed for the fields and for you to eat, including those in your households and your little children.”
GEN 47:25 They replied, “You have saved our lives! You are showing us favor, and we will be Pharaoh’s slaves.”
GEN 47:26 So Joseph made it a statute, which is in effect to this day throughout the land of Egypt: One-fifth belongs to Pharaoh. Only the land of the priests did not become Pharaoh’s.
GEN 47:27 Israel settled in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen, and they owned land there. They were fruitful and increased rapidly in number.
GEN 47:28 Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years; the years of Jacob’s life were 147 in all.
GEN 47:29 The time for Israel to die approached, so he called for his son Joseph and said to him, “If now I have found favor in your sight, put your hand under my thigh and show me kindness and faithfulness. Do not bury me in Egypt,
GEN 47:30 but when I rest with my fathers, carry me out of Egypt and bury me in their burial place.” Joseph said, “I will do as you say.”
GEN 47:31 Jacob said, “Swear to me that you will do so.” So Joseph gave him his word. Then Israel bowed down at the head of his bed.
GEN 48:1 After these things Joseph was told, “Your father is weakening.” So he took his two sons Manasseh and Ephraim with him.
GEN 48:2 When Jacob was told, “Your son Joseph has just come to you,” Israel regained strength and sat up on his bed.
GEN 48:3 Jacob said to Joseph, “The sovereign God appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me.
GEN 48:4 He said to me, ‘I am going to make you fruitful and will multiply you. I will make you into a group of nations, and I will give this land to your descendants as an everlasting possession.’
GEN 48:5 “Now, as for your two sons, who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt, they will be mine. Ephraim and Manasseh will be mine just as Reuben and Simeon are.
GEN 48:6 Any children that you father after them will be yours; they will be listed under the names of their brothers in their inheritance.
GEN 48:7 But as for me, when I was returning from Paddan, Rachel died – to my sorrow – in the land of Canaan. It happened along the way, some distance from Ephrath. So I buried her there on the way to Ephrath” (that is, Bethlehem).
GEN 48:8 When Israel saw Joseph’s sons, he asked, “Who are these?”
GEN 48:9 Joseph said to his father, “They are the sons God has given me in this place.” His father said, “Bring them to me so I may bless them.”
GEN 48:10 Now Israel’s eyes were failing because of his age; he was not able to see well. So Joseph brought his sons near to him, and his father kissed them and embraced them.
GEN 48:11 Israel said to Joseph, “I never expected to see you again, but now God has allowed me to see your children too.”
GEN 48:12 So Joseph moved them from Israel’s knees and bowed down with his face to the ground.
GEN 48:13 Joseph positioned them; he put Ephraim on his right hand across from Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh on his left hand across from Israel’s right hand. Then Joseph brought them closer to his father.
GEN 48:14 Israel stretched out his right hand and placed it on Ephraim’s head, although he was the younger. Crossing his hands, he put his left hand on Manasseh’s head, for Manasseh was the firstborn.
GEN 48:15 Then he blessed Joseph and said, “May the God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked – the God who has been my shepherd all my life long to this day,
GEN 48:16 the Angel who has protected me from all harm – bless these boys. May my name be named in them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac. May they grow into a multitude on the earth.”
GEN 48:17 When Joseph saw that his father placed his right hand on Ephraim’s head, it displeased him. So he took his father’s hand to move it from Ephraim’s head to Manasseh’s head.
GEN 48:18 Joseph said to his father, “Not so, my father, for this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.”
GEN 48:19 But his father refused and said, “I know, my son, I know. He too will become a nation and he too will become great. In spite of this, his younger brother will be even greater and his descendants will become a multitude of nations.”
GEN 48:20 So he blessed them that day, saying, “By you will Israel bless, saying, ‘May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh.’” So he put Ephraim before Manasseh.
GEN 48:21 Then Israel said to Joseph, “I am about to die, but God will be with you and will bring you back to the land of your fathers.
GEN 48:22 As one who is above your brothers, I give to you the mountain slope, which I took from the Amorites with my sword and my bow.”
GEN 49:1 Jacob called for his sons and said, “Gather together so I can tell you what will happen to you in the future.
GEN 49:2 “Assemble and listen, you sons of Jacob; listen to Israel, your father.
GEN 49:3 Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might and the beginning of my strength, outstanding in dignity, outstanding in power.
GEN 49:4 You are destructive like water and will not excel, for you got on your father’s bed, then you defiled it – he got on my couch!
GEN 49:5 Simeon and Levi are brothers, weapons of violence are their knives!
GEN 49:6 O my soul, do not come into their council, do not be united to their assembly, my heart, for in their anger they have killed men, and for pleasure they have hamstrung oxen.
GEN 49:7 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their fury, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel!
GEN 49:8 Judah, your brothers will praise you. Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies, your father’s sons will bow down before you.
GEN 49:9 You are a lion’s cub, Judah, from the prey, my son, you have gone up. He crouches and lies down like a lion; like a lioness – who will rouse him?
GEN 49:10 The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs; the nations will obey him.
GEN 49:11 Binding his foal to the vine, and his colt to the choicest vine, he will wash his garments in wine, his robes in the blood of grapes.
GEN 49:12 His eyes will be dark from wine, and his teeth white from milk.
GEN 49:13 Zebulun will live by the haven of the sea and become a haven for ships; his border will extend to Sidon.
GEN 49:14 Issachar is a strong-boned donkey lying down between two saddlebags.
GEN 49:15 When he sees a good resting place, and the pleasant land, he will bend his shoulder to the burden and become a slave laborer.
GEN 49:16 Dan will judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel.
GEN 49:17 May Dan be a snake beside the road, a viper by the path, that bites the heels of the horse so that its rider falls backward.
GEN 49:18 I wait for your deliverance, O Lord.
GEN 49:19 Gad will be raided by marauding bands, but he will attack them at their heels.
GEN 49:20 Asher’s food will be rich, and he will provide delicacies to royalty.
GEN 49:21 Naphtali is a free running doe, he speaks delightful words.
GEN 49:22 Joseph is a fruitful bough, a fruitful bough near a spring whose branches climb over the wall.
GEN 49:23 The archers will attack him, they will shoot at him and oppose him.
GEN 49:24 But his bow will remain steady, and his hands will be skillful; because of the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob, because of the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel,
GEN 49:25 because of the God of your father, who will help you, because of the sovereign God, who will bless you with blessings from the sky above, blessings from the deep that lies below, and blessings of the breasts and womb.
GEN 49:26 The blessings of your father are greater than the blessings of the eternal mountains or the desirable things of the age-old hills. They will be on the head of Joseph and on the brow of the prince of his brothers.
GEN 49:27 Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; in the morning devouring the prey, and in the evening dividing the plunder.”
GEN 49:28 These are the twelve tribes of Israel. This is what their father said to them when he blessed them. He gave each of them an appropriate blessing.
GEN 49:29 Then he instructed them, “I am about to go to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave in the field of Ephron the Hittite.
GEN 49:30 It is the cave in the field of Machpelah, near Mamre in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought for a burial plot from Ephron the Hittite.
GEN 49:31 There they buried Abraham and his wife Sarah; there they buried Isaac and his wife Rebekah; and there I buried Leah.
GEN 49:32 The field and the cave in it were acquired from the sons of Heth.”
GEN 49:33 When Jacob finished giving these instructions to his sons, he pulled his feet up onto the bed, breathed his last breath, and went to his people.
GEN 50:1 Then Joseph hugged his father’s face. He wept over him and kissed him.
GEN 50:2 Joseph instructed the physicians in his service to embalm his father, so the physicians embalmed Israel.
GEN 50:3 They took forty days, for that is the full time needed for embalming. The Egyptians mourned for him seventy days.
GEN 50:4 When the days of mourning had passed, Joseph said to Pharaoh’s royal court, “If I have found favor in your sight, please say to Pharaoh,
GEN 50:5 ‘My father made me swear an oath. He said, “I am about to die. Bury me in my tomb that I dug for myself there in the land of Canaan.” Now let me go and bury my father; then I will return.’”
GEN 50:6 So Pharaoh said, “Go and bury your father, just as he made you swear to do.”
GEN 50:7 So Joseph went up to bury his father; all Pharaoh’s officials went with him – the senior courtiers of his household, all the senior officials of the land of Egypt,
GEN 50:8 all Joseph’s household, his brothers, and his father’s household. But they left their little children and their flocks and herds in the land of Goshen.
GEN 50:9 Chariots and horsemen also went up with him, so it was a very large entourage.
GEN 50:10 When they came to the threshing floor of Atad on the other side of the Jordan, they mourned there with very great and bitter sorrow. There Joseph observed a seven day period of mourning for his father.
GEN 50:11 When the Canaanites who lived in the land saw them mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, they said, “This is a very sad occasion for the Egyptians.” That is why its name was called Abel Mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
GEN 50:12 So the sons of Jacob did for him just as he had instructed them.
GEN 50:13 His sons carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, near Mamre. This is the field Abraham purchased as a burial plot from Ephron the Hittite.
GEN 50:14 After he buried his father, Joseph returned to Egypt, along with his brothers and all who had accompanied him to bury his father.
GEN 50:15 When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, “What if Joseph bears a grudge and wants to repay us in full for all the harm we did to him?”
GEN 50:16 So they sent word to Joseph, saying, “Your father gave these instructions before he died:
GEN 50:17 ‘Tell Joseph this: Please forgive the sin of your brothers and the wrong they did when they treated you so badly.’ Now please forgive the sin of the servants of the God of your father.” When this message was reported to him, Joseph wept.
GEN 50:18 Then his brothers also came and threw themselves down before him; they said, “Here we are; we are your slaves.”
GEN 50:19 But Joseph answered them, “Don’t be afraid. Am I in the place of God?
GEN 50:20 As for you, you meant to harm me, but God intended it for a good purpose, so he could preserve the lives of many people, as you can see this day.
GEN 50:21 So now, don’t be afraid. I will provide for you and your little children.” Then he consoled them and spoke kindly to them.
GEN 50:22 Joseph lived in Egypt, along with his father’s family. Joseph lived 110 years.
GEN 50:23 Joseph saw the descendants of Ephraim to the third generation. He also saw the children of Makir the son of Manasseh; they were given special inheritance rights by Joseph.
GEN 50:24 Then Joseph said to his brothers, “I am about to die. But God will surely come to you and lead you up from this land to the land he swore on oath to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
GEN 50:25 Joseph made the sons of Israel swear an oath. He said, “God will surely come to you. Then you must carry my bones up from this place.”
GEN 50:26 So Joseph died at the age of 110. After they embalmed him, his body was placed in a coffin in Egypt.
EXO 1:1 These are the names of the sons of Israel who entered Egypt – each man with his household entered with Jacob:
EXO 1:2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
EXO 1:3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
EXO 1:4 Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
EXO 1:5 All the people who were directly descended from Jacob numbered seventy. But Joseph was already in Egypt,
EXO 1:6 and in time Joseph and his brothers and all that generation died.
EXO 1:7 The Israelites, however, were fruitful, increased greatly, multiplied, and became extremely strong, so that the land was filled with them.
EXO 1:8 Then a new king, who did not know about Joseph, came to power over Egypt.
EXO 1:9 He said to his people, “Look at the Israelite people, more numerous and stronger than we are!
EXO 1:10 Come, let’s deal wisely with them. Otherwise they will continue to multiply, and if a war breaks out, they will ally themselves with our enemies and fight against us and leave the country.”
EXO 1:11 So they put foremen over the Israelites to oppress them with hard labor. As a result they built Pithom and Rameses as store cities for Pharaoh.
EXO 1:12 But the more the Egyptians oppressed them, the more they multiplied and spread. As a result the Egyptians loathed the Israelites,
EXO 1:13 and they made the Israelites serve rigorously.
EXO 1:14 They made their lives bitter by hard service with mortar and bricks and by all kinds of service in the fields. Every kind of service the Israelites were required to give was rigorous.
EXO 1:15 The king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was named Shiphrah and the other Puah,
EXO 1:16 “When you assist the Hebrew women in childbirth, observe at the delivery: If it is a son, kill him, but if it is a daughter, she may live.”
EXO 1:17 But the midwives feared God and did not do what the king of Egypt had told them; they let the boys live.
EXO 1:18 Then the king of Egypt summoned the midwives and said to them, “Why have you done this and let the boys live?”
EXO 1:19 The midwives said to Pharaoh, “Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women – for the Hebrew women are vigorous; they give birth before the midwife gets to them!”
EXO 1:20 So God treated the midwives well, and the people multiplied and became very strong.
EXO 1:21 And because the midwives feared God, he made households for them.
EXO 1:22 Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, “All sons that are born you must throw into the river, but all daughters you may let live.”
EXO 2:1 A man from the household of Levi married a woman who was a descendant of Levi.
EXO 2:2 The woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son. When she saw that he was a healthy child, she hid him for three months.
EXO 2:3 But when she was no longer able to hide him, she took a papyrus basket for him and sealed it with bitumen and pitch. She put the child in it and set it among the reeds along the edge of the Nile.
EXO 2:4 His sister stationed herself at a distance to find out what would happen to him.
EXO 2:5 Then the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself by the Nile, while her attendants were walking alongside the river, and she saw the basket among the reeds. She sent one of her attendants, took it,
EXO 2:6 opened it, and saw the child – a boy, crying! – and she felt compassion for him and said, “This is one of the Hebrews’ children.”
EXO 2:7 Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and get a nursing woman for you from the Hebrews, so that she may nurse the child for you?”
EXO 2:8 Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Yes, do so.” So the young girl went and got the child’s mother.
EXO 2:9 Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child and nurse him for me, and I will pay your wages.” So the woman took the child and nursed him.
EXO 2:10 When the child grew older she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. She named him Moses, saying, “Because I drew him from the water.”
EXO 2:11 In those days, when Moses had grown up, he went out to his people and observed their hard labor, and he saw an Egyptian man attacking a Hebrew man, one of his own people.
EXO 2:12 He looked this way and that and saw that no one was there, and then he attacked the Egyptian and concealed the body in the sand.
EXO 2:13 When he went out the next day, there were two Hebrew men fighting. So he said to the one who was in the wrong, “Why are you attacking your fellow Hebrew?”
EXO 2:14 The man replied, “Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? Are you planning to kill me like you killed that Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid, thinking, “Surely what I did has become known.”
EXO 2:15 When Pharaoh heard about this event, he sought to kill Moses. So Moses fled from Pharaoh and settled in the land of Midian, and he settled by a certain well.
EXO 2:16 Now a priest of Midian had seven daughters, and they came and began to draw water and fill the troughs in order to water their father’s flock.
EXO 2:17 When some shepherds came and drove them away, Moses came up and defended them and then watered their flock.
EXO 2:18 So when they came home to their father Reuel, he asked, “Why have you come home so early today?”
EXO 2:19 They said, “An Egyptian man rescued us from the shepherds, and he actually drew water for us and watered the flock!”
EXO 2:20 He said to his daughters, “So where is he? Why in the world did you leave the man? Call him, so that he may eat a meal with us.”
EXO 2:21 Moses agreed to stay with the man, and he gave his daughter Zipporah to Moses in marriage.
EXO 2:22 When she bore a son, Moses named him Gershom, for he said, “I have become a resident foreigner in a foreign land.”
EXO 2:23 During that long period of time the king of Egypt died, and the Israelites groaned because of the slave labor. They cried out, and their desperate cry because of their slave labor went up to God.
EXO 2:24 God heard their groaning, God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob,
EXO 2:25 God saw the Israelites, and God understood….
EXO 3:1 Now Moses was shepherding the flock of his father-in-law Jethro, the priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the far side of the desert and came to the mountain of God, to Horeb.
EXO 3:2 The angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire from within a bush. He looked – and the bush was ablaze with fire, but it was not being consumed!
EXO 3:3 So Moses thought, “I will turn aside to see this amazing sight. Why does the bush not burn up?”
EXO 3:4 When the Lord saw that he had turned aside to look, God called to him from within the bush and said, “Moses, Moses!” And Moses said, “Here I am.”
EXO 3:5 God said, “Do not approach any closer! Take your sandals off your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.”
EXO 3:6 He added, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then Moses hid his face, because he was afraid to look at God.
EXO 3:7 The Lord said, “I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt. I have heard their cry because of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows.
EXO 3:8 I have come down to deliver them from the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up from that land to a land that is both good and spacious, to a land flowing with milk and honey, to the region of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
EXO 3:9 And now indeed the cry of the Israelites has come to me, and I have also seen how severely the Egyptians oppress them.
EXO 3:10 So now go, and I will send you to Pharaoh to bring my people, the Israelites, out of Egypt.”
EXO 3:11 Moses said to God, “Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh, or that I should bring the Israelites out of Egypt?”
EXO 3:12 He replied, “Surely I will be with you, and this will be the sign to you that I have sent you: When you bring the people out of Egypt, you and they will serve God on this mountain.”
EXO 3:13 Moses said to God, “If I go to the Israelites and tell them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ – what should I say to them?”
EXO 3:14 God said to Moses, “I am that I am.” And he said, “You must say this to the Israelites, ‘I am has sent me to you.’”
EXO 3:15 God also said to Moses, “You must say this to the Israelites, ‘The Lord – the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob – has sent me to you. This is my name forever, and this is my memorial from generation to generation.’
EXO 3:16 “Go and bring together the elders of Israel and tell them, ‘The Lord, the God of your fathers, appeared to me – the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob – saying, “I have attended carefully to you and to what has been done to you in Egypt,
EXO 3:17 and I have promised that I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.”’
EXO 3:18 “The elders will listen to you, and then you and the elders of Israel must go to the king of Egypt and tell him, ‘The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us. So now, let us go three days’ journey into the wilderness, so that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God.’
EXO 3:19 But I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go, not even under force.
EXO 3:20 So I will extend my hand and strike Egypt with all my wonders that I will do among them, and after that he will release you.
EXO 3:21 “I will grant this people favor with the Egyptians, so that when you depart you will not leave empty-handed.
EXO 3:22 Every woman will ask her neighbor and the one who happens to be staying in her house for items of silver and gold and for clothing. You will put these articles on your sons and daughters – thus you will plunder Egypt!”
EXO 4:1 Moses answered again, “And if they do not believe me or pay attention to me, but say, ‘The Lord has not appeared to you’?”
EXO 4:2 The Lord said to him, “What is that in your hand?” He said, “A staff.”
EXO 4:3 The Lord said, “Throw it to the ground.” So he threw it to the ground, and it became a snake, and Moses ran from it.
EXO 4:4 But the Lord said to Moses, “Put out your hand and grab it by the tail” – so he put out his hand and caught it, and it became a staff in his hand –
EXO 4:5 “that they may believe that the Lord, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to you.”
EXO 4:6 The Lord also said to him, “Put your hand into your robe.” So he put his hand into his robe, and when he brought it out – there was his hand, leprous like snow!
EXO 4:7 He said, “Put your hand back into your robe.” So he put his hand back into his robe, and when he brought it out from his robe – there it was, restored like the rest of his skin!
EXO 4:8 “If they do not believe you or pay attention to the former sign, then they may believe the latter sign.
EXO 4:9 And if they do not believe even these two signs or listen to you, then take some water from the Nile and pour it out on the dry ground. The water you take out of the Nile will become blood on the dry ground.”
EXO 4:10 Then Moses said to the Lord, “O my Lord, I am not an eloquent man, neither in the past nor since you have spoken to your servant, for I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.”
EXO 4:11 The Lord said to him, “Who gave a mouth to man, or who makes a person mute or deaf or seeing or blind? Is it not I, the Lord?
EXO 4:12 So now go, and I will be with your mouth and will teach you what you must say.”
EXO 4:13 But Moses said, “O my Lord, please send anyone else whom you wish to send!”
EXO 4:14 Then the Lord became angry with Moses, and he said, “What about your brother Aaron the Levite? I know that he can speak very well. Moreover, he is coming to meet you, and when he sees you he will be glad in his heart.
EXO 4:15 “So you are to speak to him and put the words in his mouth. And as for me, I will be with your mouth and with his mouth, and I will teach you both what you must do.
EXO 4:16 He will speak for you to the people, and it will be as if he were your mouth and as if you were his God.
EXO 4:17 You will also take in your hand this staff, with which you will do the signs.”
EXO 4:18 So Moses went back to his father-in-law Jethro and said to him, “Let me go, so that I may return to my relatives in Egypt and see if they are still alive.” Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.”
EXO 4:19 The Lord said to Moses in Midian, “Go back to Egypt, because all the men who were seeking your life are dead.”
EXO 4:20 Then Moses took his wife and sons and put them on a donkey and headed back to the land of Egypt, and Moses took the staff of God in his hand.
EXO 4:21 The Lord said to Moses, “When you go back to Egypt, see that you do before Pharaoh all the wonders I have put under your control. But I will harden his heart and he will not let the people go.
EXO 4:22 You must say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the Lord, “Israel is my son, my firstborn,
EXO 4:23 and I said to you, ‘Let my son go that he may serve me,’ but since you have refused to let him go, I will surely kill your son, your firstborn!”’”
EXO 4:24 Now on the way, at a place where they stopped for the night, the Lord met Moses and sought to kill him.
EXO 4:25 But Zipporah took a flint knife, cut off the foreskin of her son and touched it to Moses’ feet, and said, “Surely you are a bridegroom of blood to me.”
EXO 4:26 So the Lord let him alone. (At that time she said, “A bridegroom of blood,” referring to the circumcision.)
EXO 4:27 The Lord said to Aaron, “Go to the wilderness to meet Moses. So he went and met him at the mountain of God and greeted him with a kiss.
EXO 4:28 Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had sent him and all the signs that he had commanded him.
EXO 4:29 Then Moses and Aaron went and brought together all the Israelite elders.
EXO 4:30 Aaron spoke all the words that the Lord had spoken to Moses and did the signs in the sight of the people,
EXO 4:31 and the people believed. When they heard that the Lord had attended to the Israelites and that he had seen their affliction, they bowed down close to the ground.
EXO 5:1 Afterward Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, ‘Release my people so that they may hold a pilgrim feast to me in the desert.’”
EXO 5:2 But Pharaoh said, “Who is the Lord that I should obey him by releasing Israel? I do not know the Lord, and I will not release Israel!”
EXO 5:3 And they said, “The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Let us go a three-day journey into the desert so that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God, so that he does not strike us with plague or the sword.”
EXO 5:4 The king of Egypt said to them, “Moses and Aaron, why do you cause the people to refrain from their work? Return to your labor!”
EXO 5:5 Pharaoh was thinking, “The people of the land are now many, and you are giving them rest from their labor.”
EXO 5:6 That same day Pharaoh commanded the slave masters and foremen who were over the people:
EXO 5:7 “You must no longer give straw to the people for making bricks as before. Let them go and collect straw for themselves.
EXO 5:8 But you must require of them the same quota of bricks that they were making before. Do not reduce it, for they are slackers. That is why they are crying, ‘Let us go sacrifice to our God.’
EXO 5:9 Make the work harder for the men so they will keep at it and pay no attention to lying words!”
EXO 5:10 So the slave masters of the people and their foremen went to the Israelites and said, “Thus says Pharaoh: ‘I am not giving you straw.
EXO 5:11 You go get straw for yourselves wherever you can find it, because there will be no reduction at all in your workload.’”
EXO 5:12 So the people spread out through all the land of Egypt to collect stubble for straw.
EXO 5:13 The slave masters were pressuring them, saying, “Complete your work for each day, just like when there was straw!”
EXO 5:14 The Israelite foremen whom Pharaoh’s slave masters had set over them were beaten and were asked, “Why did you not complete your requirement for brickmaking as in the past – both yesterday and today?”
EXO 5:15 The Israelite foremen went and cried out to Pharaoh, “Why are you treating your servants this way?
EXO 5:16 No straw is given to your servants, but we are told, ‘Make bricks!’ Your servants are even being beaten, but the fault is with your people.”
EXO 5:17 But Pharaoh replied, “You are slackers! Slackers! That is why you are saying, ‘Let us go sacrifice to the Lord.’
EXO 5:18 So now, get back to work! You will not be given straw, but you must still produce your quota of bricks!”
EXO 5:19 The Israelite foremen saw that they were in trouble when they were told, “You must not reduce the daily quota of your bricks.”
EXO 5:20 When they went out from Pharaoh, they encountered Moses and Aaron standing there to meet them,
EXO 5:21 and they said to them, “May the Lord look on you and judge, because you have made us stink in the opinion of Pharaoh and his servants, so that you have given them an excuse to kill us!”
EXO 5:22 Moses returned to the Lord, and said, “Lord, why have you caused trouble for this people? Why did you ever send me?
EXO 5:23 From the time I went to speak to Pharaoh in your name, he has caused trouble for this people, and you have certainly not rescued them!”
EXO 6:1 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh, for compelled by my strong hand he will release them, and by my strong hand he will drive them out of his land.”
EXO 6:2 God spoke to Moses and said to him, “I am the Lord.
EXO 6:3 I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob as God Almighty, but by my name ‘the Lord’ I was not known to them.
EXO 6:4 I also established my covenant with them to give them the land of Canaan, where they were living as resident foreigners.
EXO 6:5 I have also heard the groaning of the Israelites, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I have remembered my covenant.
EXO 6:6 Therefore, tell the Israelites, ‘I am the Lord. I will bring you out from your enslavement to the Egyptians, I will rescue you from the hard labor they impose, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments.
EXO 6:7 I will take you to myself for a people, and I will be your God. Then you will know that I am the Lord your God, who brought you out from your enslavement to the Egyptians.
EXO 6:8 I will bring you to the land I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob – and I will give it to you as a possession. I am the Lord!’”
EXO 6:9 Moses told this to the Israelites, but they did not listen to him because of their discouragement and hard labor.
EXO 6:10 Then the Lord said to Moses,
EXO 6:11 “Go, tell Pharaoh king of Egypt that he must release the Israelites from his land.”
EXO 6:12 But Moses replied to the Lord, “If the Israelites did not listen to me, then how will Pharaoh listen to me, since I speak with difficulty?”
EXO 6:13 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them a charge for the Israelites and Pharaoh king of Egypt to bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 6:14 These are the heads of their fathers’ households: The sons of Reuben, the firstborn son of Israel, were Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi. These were the clans of Reuben.
EXO 6:15 The sons of Simeon were Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jakin, Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanite woman. These were the clans of Simeon.
EXO 6:16 Now these are the names of the sons of Levi, according to their records: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. (The length of Levi’s life was 137 years.)
EXO 6:17 The sons of Gershon, by their families, were Libni and Shimei.
EXO 6:18 The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. (The length of Kohath’s life was 133 years.)
EXO 6:19 The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi. These were the clans of Levi, according to their records.
EXO 6:20 Amram married his father’s sister Jochebed, and she bore him Aaron and Moses. (The length of Amram’s life was 137 years.)
EXO 6:21 The sons of Izhar were Korah, Nepheg, and Zikri.
EXO 6:22 The sons of Uzziel were Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri.
EXO 6:23 Aaron married Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon, and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
EXO 6:24 The sons of Korah were Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. These were the Korahite clans.
EXO 6:25 Now Eleazar son of Aaron married one of the daughters of Putiel and she bore him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers’ households of Levi according to their clans.
EXO 6:26 It was the same Aaron and Moses to whom the Lord said, “Bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt by their regiments.”
EXO 6:27 They were the men who were speaking to Pharaoh king of Egypt, in order to bring the Israelites out of Egypt. It was the same Moses and Aaron.
EXO 6:28 When the Lord spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,
EXO 6:29 he said to him, “I am the Lord. Tell Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I am telling you.”
EXO 6:30 But Moses said before the Lord, “Since I speak with difficulty, why should Pharaoh listen to me?”
EXO 7:1 So the Lord said to Moses, “See, I have made you like God to Pharaoh, and your brother Aaron will be your prophet.
EXO 7:2 You are to speak everything I command you, and your brother Aaron is to tell Pharaoh that he must release the Israelites from his land.
EXO 7:3 But I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and although I will multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt,
EXO 7:4 Pharaoh will not listen to you. I will reach into Egypt and bring out my regiments, my people the Israelites, from the land of Egypt with great acts of judgment.
EXO 7:5 Then the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord, when I extend my hand over Egypt and bring the Israelites out from among them.
EXO 7:6 And Moses and Aaron did so; they did just as the Lord commanded them.
EXO 7:7 Now Moses was eighty years old and Aaron was eighty-three years old when they spoke to Pharaoh.
EXO 7:8 The Lord said to Moses and Aaron,
EXO 7:9 “When Pharaoh says to you, ‘Do a miracle,’ and you say to Aaron, ‘Take your staff and throw it down before Pharaoh,’ it will become a snake.”
EXO 7:10 When Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh, they did so, just as the Lord had commanded them – Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his servants and it became a snake.
EXO 7:11 Then Pharaoh also summoned wise men and sorcerers, and the magicians of Egypt by their secret arts did the same thing.
EXO 7:12 Each man threw down his staff, and the staffs became snakes. But Aaron’s staff swallowed up their staffs.
EXO 7:13 Yet Pharaoh’s heart became hard, and he did not listen to them, just as the Lord had predicted.
EXO 7:14 The Lord said to Moses, “Pharaoh’s heart is hard; he refuses to release the people.
EXO 7:15 Go to Pharaoh in the morning when he goes out to the water. Position yourself to meet him by the edge of the Nile, and take in your hand the staff that was turned into a snake.
EXO 7:16 Tell him, ‘The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to you to say, “Release my people, that they may serve me in the desert!” But until now you have not listened.
EXO 7:17 Thus says the Lord: “By this you will know that I am the Lord: I am going to strike the water of the Nile with the staff that is in my hand, and it will be turned into blood.
EXO 7:18 Fish in the Nile will die, the Nile will stink, and the Egyptians will be unable to drink water from the Nile.”’”
EXO 7:19 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Take your staff and stretch out your hand over Egypt’s waters – over their rivers, over their canals, over their ponds, and over all their reservoirs – so that it becomes blood.’ There will be blood everywhere in the land of Egypt, even in wooden and stone containers.”
EXO 7:20 Moses and Aaron did so, just as the Lord had commanded. Moses raised the staff and struck the water that was in the Nile right before the eyes of Pharaoh and his servants, and all the water that was in the Nile was turned to blood.
EXO 7:21 When the fish that were in the Nile died, the Nile began to stink, so that the Egyptians could not drink water from the Nile. There was blood everywhere in the land of Egypt!
EXO 7:22 But the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts, and so Pharaoh’s heart remained hard, and he refused to listen to Moses and Aaron – just as the Lord had predicted.
EXO 7:23 And Pharaoh turned and went into his house. He did not pay any attention to this.
EXO 7:24 All the Egyptians dug around the Nile for water to drink, because they could not drink the water of the Nile.
EXO 7:25 Seven full days passed after the Lord struck the Nile.
EXO 8:1 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh and tell him, ‘Thus says the Lord: “Release my people in order that they may serve me!
EXO 8:2 But if you refuse to release them, then I am going to plague all your territory with frogs.
EXO 8:3 The Nile will swarm with frogs, and they will come up and go into your house, in your bedroom, and on your bed, and into the houses of your servants and your people, and into your ovens and your kneading troughs.
EXO 8:4 Frogs will come up against you, your people, and all your servants.”’”
EXO 8:5 The Lord spoke to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Extend your hand with your staff over the rivers, over the canals, and over the ponds, and bring the frogs up over the land of Egypt.’”
EXO 8:6 So Aaron extended his hand over the waters of Egypt, and frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:7 The magicians did the same with their secret arts and brought up frogs on the land of Egypt too.
EXO 8:8 Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “Pray to the Lord that he may take the frogs away from me and my people, and I will release the people that they may sacrifice to the Lord.”
EXO 8:9 Moses said to Pharaoh, “You may have the honor over me – when shall I pray for you, your servants, and your people, for the frogs to be removed from you and your houses, so that they will be left only in the Nile?”
EXO 8:10 He said, “Tomorrow.” And Moses said, “It will be as you say, so that you may know that there is no one like the Lord our God.
EXO 8:11 The frogs will depart from you, your houses, your servants, and your people; they will be left only in the Nile.”
EXO 8:12 Then Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, and Moses cried to the Lord because of the frogs that he had brought on Pharaoh.
EXO 8:13 The Lord did as Moses asked – the frogs died out of the houses, the villages, and the fields.
EXO 8:14 The Egyptians piled them in countless heaps, and the land stank.
EXO 8:15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart and did not listen to them, just as the Lord had predicted.
EXO 8:16 The Lord said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Extend your staff and strike the dust of the ground, and it will become gnats throughout all the land of Egypt.’”
EXO 8:17 They did so; Aaron extended his hand with his staff, he struck the dust of the ground, and it became gnats on people and on animals. All the dust of the ground became gnats throughout all the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:18 When the magicians attempted to bring forth gnats by their secret arts, they could not. So there were gnats on people and on animals.
EXO 8:19 The magicians said to Pharaoh, “It is the finger of God!” But Pharaoh’s heart remained hard, and he did not listen to them, just as the Lord had predicted.
EXO 8:20 The Lord said to Moses, “Get up early in the morning and position yourself before Pharaoh as he goes out to the water, and tell him, ‘Thus says the Lord, “Release my people that they may serve me!
EXO 8:21 If you do not release my people, then I am going to send swarms of flies on you and on your servants and on your people and in your houses. The houses of the Egyptians will be full of flies, and even the ground they stand on.
EXO 8:22 But on that day I will mark off the land of Goshen, where my people are staying, so that no swarms of flies will be there, that you may know that I am the Lord in the midst of this land.
EXO 8:23 I will put a division between my people and your people. This sign will take place tomorrow.”’”
EXO 8:24 The Lord did so; a thick swarm of flies came into Pharaoh’s house and into the houses of his servants, and throughout the whole land of Egypt the land was ruined because of the swarms of flies.
EXO 8:25 Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “Go, sacrifice to your God within the land.”
EXO 8:26 But Moses said, “That would not be the right thing to do, for the sacrifices we make to the Lord our God would be an abomination to the Egyptians. If we make sacrifices that are an abomination to the Egyptians right before their eyes, will they not stone us?
EXO 8:27 We must go on a three-day journey into the desert and sacrifice to the Lord our God, just as he is telling us.”
EXO 8:28 Pharaoh said, “I will release you so that you may sacrifice to the Lord your God in the desert. Only you must not go very far. Do pray for me.”
EXO 8:29 Moses said, “I am going to go out from you and pray to the Lord, and the swarms of flies will go away from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people tomorrow. Only do not let Pharaoh deal falsely again by not releasing the people to sacrifice to the Lord.”
EXO 8:30 So Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord,
EXO 8:31 and the Lord did as Moses asked – he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people. Not one remained!
EXO 8:32 But Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also and did not release the people.
EXO 9:1 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh and tell him, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, “Release my people that they may serve me!
EXO 9:2 For if you refuse to release them and continue holding them,
EXO 9:3 then the hand of the Lord will surely bring a very terrible plague on your livestock in the field, on the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herds, and the flocks.
EXO 9:4 But the Lord will distinguish between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, and nothing will die of all that the Israelites have.”’”
EXO 9:5 The Lord set an appointed time, saying, “Tomorrow the Lord will do this in the land.”
EXO 9:6 And the Lord did this on the next day; all the livestock of the Egyptians died, but of the Israelites’ livestock not one died.
EXO 9:7 Pharaoh sent representatives to investigate, and indeed, not even one of the livestock of Israel had died. But Pharaoh’s heart remained hard, and he did not release the people.
EXO 9:8 Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, “Take handfuls of soot from a furnace, and have Moses throw it into the air while Pharaoh is watching.
EXO 9:9 It will become fine dust over the whole land of Egypt and will cause boils to break out and fester on both people and animals in all the land of Egypt.”
EXO 9:10 So they took soot from a furnace and stood before Pharaoh, Moses threw it into the air, and it caused festering boils to break out on both people and animals.
EXO 9:11 The magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils, for boils were on the magicians and on all the Egyptians.
EXO 9:12 But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not listen to them, just as the Lord had predicted to Moses.
EXO 9:13 The Lord said to Moses, “Get up early in the morning, stand before Pharaoh, and tell him, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews: “Release my people so that they may serve me!
EXO 9:14 For this time I will send all my plagues on your very self and on your servants and your people, so that you may know that there is no one like me in all the earth.
EXO 9:15 For by now I could have stretched out my hand and struck you and your people with plague, and you would have been destroyed from the earth.
EXO 9:16 But for this purpose I have caused you to stand: to show you my strength, and so that my name may be declared in all the earth.
EXO 9:17 You are still exalting yourself against my people by not releasing them.
EXO 9:18 I am going to cause very severe hail to rain down about this time tomorrow, such hail as has never occurred in Egypt from the day it was founded until now.
EXO 9:19 So now, send instructions to gather your livestock and all your possessions in the fields to a safe place. Every person or animal caught in the field and not brought into the house – the hail will come down on them, and they will die!”’”
EXO 9:20 Those of Pharaoh’s servants who feared the word of the Lord hurried to bring their servants and livestock into the houses,
EXO 9:21 but those who did not take the word of the Lord seriously left their servants and their cattle in the field.
EXO 9:22 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Extend your hand toward the sky that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, on people and on animals, and on everything that grows in the field in the land of Egypt.”
EXO 9:23 When Moses extended his staff toward the sky, the Lord sent thunder and hail, and fire fell to the earth; so the Lord caused hail to rain down on the land of Egypt.
EXO 9:24 Hail fell and fire mingled with the hail; the hail was so severe that there had not been any like it in all the land of Egypt since it had become a nation.
EXO 9:25 The hail struck everything in the open fields, both people and animals, throughout all the land of Egypt. The hail struck everything that grows in the field, and it broke all the trees of the field to pieces.
EXO 9:26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the Israelites lived, was there no hail.
EXO 9:27 So Pharaoh sent and summoned Moses and Aaron and said to them, “I have sinned this time! The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are guilty.
EXO 9:28 Pray to the Lord, for the mighty thunderings and hail are too much! I will release you and you will stay no longer.”
EXO 9:29 Moses said to him, “When I leave the city I will spread my hands to the Lord, the thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail, so that you may know that the earth belongs to the Lord.
EXO 9:30 But as for you and your servants, I know that you do not yet fear the Lord God.”
EXO 9:31 (Now the flax and the barley were struck by the hail, for the barley had ripened and the flax was in bud.
EXO 9:32 But the wheat and the spelt were not struck, for they are later crops.)
EXO 9:33 So Moses left Pharaoh, went out of the city, and spread out his hands to the Lord, and the thunder and the hail ceased, and the rain stopped pouring on the earth.
EXO 9:34 When Pharaoh saw that the rain and hail and thunder ceased, he sinned again: both he and his servants hardened their hearts.
EXO 9:35 So Pharaoh’s heart remained hard, and he did not release the Israelites, as the Lord had predicted through Moses.
EXO 10:1 The Lord said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, in order to display these signs of mine before him,
EXO 10:2 and in order that in the hearing of your son and your grandson you may tell how I made fools of the Egyptians and about my signs that I displayed among them, so that you may know that I am the Lord.”
EXO 10:3 So Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh and told him, “Thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews: ‘How long do you refuse to humble yourself before me? Release my people so that they may serve me!
EXO 10:4 But if you refuse to release my people, I am going to bring locusts into your territory tomorrow.
EXO 10:5 They will cover the surface of the earth, so that you will be unable to see the ground. They will eat the remainder of what escaped – what is left over for you – from the hail, and they will eat every tree that grows for you from the field.
EXO 10:6 They will fill your houses, the houses of your servants, and all the houses of Egypt, such as neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen since they have been in the land until this day!’” Then Moses turned and went out from Pharaoh.
EXO 10:7 Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “How long will this man be a menace to us? Release the people so that they may serve the Lord their God. Do you not know that Egypt is destroyed?”
EXO 10:8 So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh, and he said to them, “Go, serve the Lord your God. Exactly who is going with you?”
EXO 10:9 Moses said, “We will go with our young and our old, with our sons and our daughters, and with our sheep and our cattle we will go, because we are to hold a pilgrim feast for the Lord.”
EXO 10:10 He said to them, “The Lord will need to be with you if I release you and your dependents! Watch out! Trouble is right in front of you!
EXO 10:11 No! Go, you men only, and serve the Lord, for that is what you want.” Then Moses and Aaron were driven out of Pharaoh’s presence.
EXO 10:12 The Lord said to Moses, “Extend your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up over the land of Egypt and eat everything that grows in the ground, everything that the hail has left.”
EXO 10:13 So Moses extended his staff over the land of Egypt, and then the Lord brought an east wind on the land all that day and all night. The morning came, and the east wind had brought up the locusts!
EXO 10:14 The locusts went up over all the land of Egypt and settled down in all the territory of Egypt. It was very severe; there had been no locusts like them before, nor will there be such ever again.
EXO 10:15 They covered the surface of all the ground, so that the ground became dark with them, and they ate all the vegetation of the ground and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left. Nothing green remained on the trees or on anything that grew in the fields throughout the whole land of Egypt.
EXO 10:16 Then Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you!
EXO 10:17 So now, forgive my sin this time only, and pray to the Lord your God that he would only take this death away from me.”
EXO 10:18 Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord,
EXO 10:19 and the Lord turned a very strong west wind, and it picked up the locusts and blew them into the Red Sea. Not one locust remained in all the territory of Egypt.
EXO 10:20 But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not release the Israelites.
EXO 10:21 The Lord said to Moses, “Extend your hand toward heaven so that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness so thick it can be felt.”
EXO 10:22 So Moses extended his hand toward heaven, and there was absolute darkness throughout the land of Egypt for three days.
EXO 10:23 No one could see another person, and no one could rise from his place for three days. But the Israelites had light in the places where they lived.
EXO 10:24 Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and said, “Go, serve the Lord – only your flocks and herds will be detained. Even your families may go with you.”
EXO 10:25 But Moses said, “Will you also provide us with sacrifices and burnt offerings that we may present them to the Lord our God?
EXO 10:26 Our livestock must also go with us! Not a hoof is to be left behind! For we must take these animals to serve the Lord our God. Until we arrive there, we do not know what we must use to serve the Lord.”
EXO 10:27 But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he was not willing to release them.
EXO 10:28 Pharaoh said to him, “Go from me! Watch out for yourself! Do not appear before me again, for when you see my face you will die!”
EXO 10:29 Moses said, “As you wish! I will not see your face again.”
EXO 11:1 The Lord said to Moses, “I will bring one more plague on Pharaoh and on Egypt; after that he will release you from this place. When he releases you, he will drive you out completely from this place.
EXO 11:2 Instruct the people that each man and each woman is to request from his or her neighbor items of silver and gold.”
EXO 11:3 (Now the Lord granted the people favor with the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, respected by Pharaoh’s servants and by the Egyptian people.)
EXO 11:4 Moses said, “Thus says the Lord: ‘About midnight I will go throughout Egypt,
EXO 11:5 and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt will die, from the firstborn son of Pharaoh who sits on his throne, to the firstborn son of the slave girl who is at her hand mill, and all the firstborn of the cattle.
EXO 11:6 There will be a great cry throughout the whole land of Egypt, such as there has never been, nor ever will be again.
EXO 11:7 But against any of the Israelites not even a dog will bark against either people or animals, so that you may know that the Lord distinguishes between Egypt and Israel.’
EXO 11:8 All these your servants will come down to me and bow down to me, saying, ‘Go, you and all the people who follow you,’ and after that I will go out.” Then Moses went out from Pharaoh in great anger.
EXO 11:9 The Lord said to Moses, “Pharaoh will not listen to you, so that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.”
EXO 11:10 So Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, but the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not release the Israelites from his land.
EXO 12:1 The Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt,
EXO 12:2 “This month is to be your beginning of months; it will be your first month of the year.
EXO 12:3 Tell the whole community of Israel, ‘In the tenth day of this month they each must take a lamb for themselves according to their families – a lamb for each household.
EXO 12:4 If any household is too small for a lamb, the man and his next-door neighbor are to take a lamb according to the number of people – you will make your count for the lamb according to how much each one can eat.
EXO 12:5 Your lamb must be perfect, a male, one year old; you may take it from the sheep or from the goats.
EXO 12:6 You must care for it until the fourteenth day of this month, and then the whole community of Israel will kill it around sundown.
EXO 12:7 They will take some of the blood and put it on the two side posts and top of the doorframe of the houses where they will eat it.
EXO 12:8 They will eat the meat the same night; they will eat it roasted over the fire with bread made without yeast and with bitter herbs.
EXO 12:9 Do not eat it raw or boiled in water, but roast it over the fire with its head, its legs, and its entrails.
EXO 12:10 You must leave nothing until morning, but you must burn with fire whatever remains of it until morning.
EXO 12:11 This is how you are to eat it – dressed to travel, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand. You are to eat it in haste. It is the Lord’s Passover.
EXO 12:12 I will pass through the land of Egypt in the same night, and I will attack all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both of humans and of animals, and on all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment. I am the Lord.
EXO 12:13 The blood will be a sign for you on the houses where you are, so that when I see the blood I will pass over you, and this plague will not fall on you to destroy you when I attack the land of Egypt.
EXO 12:14 This day will become a memorial for you, and you will celebrate it as a festival to the Lord – you will celebrate it perpetually as a lasting ordinance.
EXO 12:15 For seven days you must eat bread made without yeast. Surely on the first day you must put away yeast from your houses because anyone who eats bread made with yeast from the first day to the seventh day will be cut off from Israel.
EXO 12:16 On the first day there will be a holy convocation, and on the seventh day there will be a holy convocation for you. You must do no work of any kind on them, only what every person will eat – that alone may be prepared for you.
EXO 12:17 So you will keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread, because on this very day I brought your regiments out from the land of Egypt, and so you must keep this day perpetually as a lasting ordinance.
EXO 12:18 In the first month, from the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, you will eat bread made without yeast until the twenty-first day of the month in the evening.
EXO 12:19 For seven days yeast must not be found in your houses, for whoever eats what is made with yeast – that person will be cut off from the community of Israel, whether a foreigner or one born in the land.
EXO 12:20 You will not eat anything made with yeast; in all the places where you live you must eat bread made without yeast.’”
EXO 12:21 Then Moses summoned all the elders of Israel, and told them, “Go and select for yourselves a lamb or young goat for your families, and kill the Passover animals.
EXO 12:22 Take a branch of hyssop, dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and apply to the top of the doorframe and the two side posts some of the blood that is in the basin. Not one of you is to go out the door of his house until morning.
EXO 12:23 For the Lord will pass through to strike Egypt, and when he sees the blood on the top of the doorframe and the two side posts, then the Lord will pass over the door, and he will not permit the destroyer to enter your houses to strike you.
EXO 12:24 You must observe this event as an ordinance for you and for your children forever.
EXO 12:25 When you enter the land that the Lord will give to you, just as he said, you must observe this ceremony.
EXO 12:26 When your children ask you, ‘What does this ceremony mean to you?’ –
EXO 12:27 then you will say, ‘It is the sacrifice of the Lord’s Passover, when he passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt, when he struck Egypt and delivered our households.’” The people bowed down low to the ground,
EXO 12:28 and the Israelites went away and did exactly as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron.
EXO 12:29 It happened at midnight – the Lord attacked all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the prison, and all the firstborn of the cattle.
EXO 12:30 Pharaoh got up in the night, along with all his servants and all Egypt, and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was no house in which there was not someone dead.
EXO 12:31 Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron in the night and said, “Get up, get out from among my people, both you and the Israelites! Go, serve the Lord as you have requested!
EXO 12:32 Also, take your flocks and your herds, just as you have requested, and leave. But bless me also.”
EXO 12:33 The Egyptians were urging the people on, in order to send them out of the land quickly, for they were saying, “We are all dead!”
EXO 12:34 So the people took their dough before the yeast was added, with their kneading troughs bound up in their clothing on their shoulders.
EXO 12:35 Now the Israelites had done as Moses told them – they had requested from the Egyptians silver and gold items and clothing.
EXO 12:36 The Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, and they gave them whatever they wanted, and so they plundered Egypt.
EXO 12:37 The Israelites journeyed from Rameses to Sukkoth. There were about 600,000 men on foot, plus their dependants.
EXO 12:38 A mixed multitude also went up with them, and flocks and herds – a very large number of cattle.
EXO 12:39 They baked cakes of bread without yeast using the dough they had brought from Egypt, for it was made without yeast – because they were thrust out of Egypt and were not able to delay, they could not prepare food for themselves either.
EXO 12:40 Now the length of time the Israelites lived in Egypt was 430 years.
EXO 12:41 At the end of the 430 years, on the very day, all the regiments of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 12:42 It was a night of vigil for the Lord to bring them out from the land of Egypt, and so on this night all Israel is to keep the vigil to the Lord for generations to come.
EXO 12:43 The Lord said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the ordinance of the Passover. No foreigner may share in eating it.
EXO 12:44 But everyone’s servant who is bought for money, after you have circumcised him, may eat it.
EXO 12:45 A foreigner and a hired worker must not eat it.
EXO 12:46 It must be eaten in one house; you must not bring any of the meat outside the house, and you must not break a bone of it.
EXO 12:47 The whole community of Israel must observe it.
EXO 12:48 “When a foreigner lives with you and wants to observe the Passover to the Lord, all his males must be circumcised, and then he may approach and observe it, and he will be like one who is born in the land – but no uncircumcised person may eat of it.
EXO 12:49 The same law will apply to the person who is native-born and to the foreigner who lives among you.”
EXO 12:50 So all the Israelites did exactly as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron.
EXO 12:51 And on this very day the Lord brought the Israelites out of the land of Egypt by their regiments.
EXO 13:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 13:2 “Set apart to me every firstborn male – the first offspring of every womb among the Israelites, whether human or animal; it is mine.”
EXO 13:3 Moses said to the people, “Remember this day on which you came out from Egypt, from the place where you were enslaved, for the Lord brought you out of there with a mighty hand – and no bread made with yeast may be eaten.
EXO 13:4 On this day, in the month of Abib, you are going out.
EXO 13:5 When the Lord brings you to the land of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which he swore to your fathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, then you will keep this ceremony in this month.
EXO 13:6 For seven days you must eat bread made without yeast, and on the seventh day there is to be a festival to the Lord.
EXO 13:7 Bread made without yeast must be eaten for seven days; no bread made with yeast shall be seen among you, and you must have no yeast among you within any of your borders.
EXO 13:8 You are to tell your son on that day, ‘It is because of what the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt.’
EXO 13:9 It will be a sign for you on your hand and a memorial on your forehead, so that the law of the Lord may be in your mouth, for with a mighty hand the Lord brought you out of Egypt.
EXO 13:10 So you must keep this ordinance at its appointed time from year to year.
EXO 13:11 When the Lord brings you into the land of the Canaanites, as he swore to you and to your fathers, and gives it to you,
EXO 13:12 then you must give over to the Lord the first offspring of every womb. Every firstling of a beast that you have – the males will be the Lord’s.
EXO 13:13 Every firstling of a donkey you must redeem with a lamb, and if you do not redeem it, then you must break its neck. Every firstborn of your sons you must redeem.
EXO 13:14 In the future, when your son asks you ‘What is this?’ you are to tell him, ‘With a mighty hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the land of slavery.
EXO 13:15 When Pharaoh stubbornly refused to release us, the Lord killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of people to the firstborn of animals. That is why I am sacrificing to the Lord the first male offspring of every womb, but all my firstborn sons I redeem.’
EXO 13:16 It will be for a sign on your hand and for frontlets on your forehead, for with a mighty hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt.”
EXO 13:17 When Pharaoh released the people, God did not lead them by the way to the land of the Philistines, although that was nearby, for God said, “Lest the people change their minds and return to Egypt when they experience war.”
EXO 13:18 So God brought the people around by the way of the desert to the Red Sea, and the Israelites went up from the land of Egypt prepared for battle.
EXO 13:19 Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for Joseph had made the Israelites solemnly swear, “God will surely attend to you, and you will carry my bones up from this place with you.”
EXO 13:20 They journeyed from Sukkoth and camped in Etham, on the edge of the desert.
EXO 13:21 Now the Lord was going before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them in the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, so that they could travel day or night.
EXO 13:22 He did not remove the pillar of cloud by day nor the pillar of fire by night from before the people.
EXO 14:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 14:2 “Tell the Israelites that they must turn and camp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea; you are to camp by the sea before Baal Zephon opposite it.
EXO 14:3 Pharaoh will think regarding the Israelites, ‘They are wandering around confused in the land – the desert has closed in on them.’
EXO 14:4 I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and he will chase after them. I will gain honor because of Pharaoh and because of all his army, and the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord.” So this is what they did.
EXO 14:5 When it was reported to the king of Egypt that the people had fled, the heart of Pharaoh and his servants was turned against the people, and the king and his servants said, “What in the world have we done? For we have released the people of Israel from serving us!”
EXO 14:6 Then he prepared his chariots and took his army with him.
EXO 14:7 He took six hundred select chariots, and all the rest of the chariots of Egypt, and officers on all of them.
EXO 14:8 But the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he chased after the Israelites. Now the Israelites were going out defiantly.
EXO 14:9 The Egyptians chased after them, and all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh and his horsemen and his army overtook them camping by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-Zephon.
EXO 14:10 When Pharaoh got closer, the Israelites looked up, and there were the Egyptians marching after them, and they were terrified. The Israelites cried out to the Lord,
EXO 14:11 and they said to Moses, “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the desert? What in the world have you done to us by bringing us out of Egypt?
EXO 14:12 Isn’t this what we told you in Egypt, ‘Leave us alone so that we can serve the Egyptians, because it is better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the desert!’”
EXO 14:13 Moses said to the people, “Do not fear! Stand firm and see the salvation of the Lord that he will provide for you today; for the Egyptians that you see today you will never, ever see again.
EXO 14:14 The Lord will fight for you, and you can be still.”
EXO 14:15 The Lord said to Moses, “Why do you cry out to me? Tell the Israelites to move on.
EXO 14:16 And as for you, lift up your staff and extend your hand toward the sea and divide it, so that the Israelites may go through the middle of the sea on dry ground.
EXO 14:17 And as for me, I am going to harden the hearts of the Egyptians so that they will come after them, that I may be honored because of Pharaoh and his army and his chariots and his horsemen.
EXO 14:18 And the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord when I have gained my honor because of Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen.”
EXO 14:19 The angel of God, who was going before the camp of Israel, moved and went behind them, and the pillar of cloud moved from before them and stood behind them.
EXO 14:20 It came between the Egyptian camp and the Israelite camp; it was a dark cloud and it lit up the night so that one camp did not come near the other the whole night.
EXO 14:21 Moses stretched out his hand toward the sea, and the Lord drove the sea apart by a strong east wind all that night, and he made the sea into dry land, and the water was divided.
EXO 14:22 So the Israelites went through the middle of the sea on dry ground, the water forming a wall for them on their right and on their left.
EXO 14:23 The Egyptians chased them and followed them into the middle of the sea – all the horses of Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen.
EXO 14:24 In the morning watch the Lord looked down on the Egyptian army through the pillar of fire and cloud, and he threw the Egyptian army into a panic.
EXO 14:25 He jammed the wheels of their chariots so that they had difficulty driving, and the Egyptians said, “Let’s flee from Israel, for the Lord fights for them against Egypt!”
EXO 14:26 The Lord said to Moses, “Extend your hand toward the sea, so that the waters may flow back on the Egyptians, on their chariots, and on their horsemen!”
EXO 14:27 So Moses extended his hand toward the sea, and the sea returned to its normal state when the sun began to rise. Now the Egyptians were fleeing before it, but the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the middle of the sea.
EXO 14:28 The water returned and covered the chariots and the horsemen and all the army of Pharaoh that was coming after the Israelites into the sea – not so much as one of them survived!
EXO 14:29 But the Israelites walked on dry ground in the middle of the sea, the water forming a wall for them on their right and on their left.
EXO 14:30 So the Lord saved Israel on that day from the power of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the shore of the sea.
EXO 14:31 When Israel saw the great power that the Lord had exercised over the Egyptians, they feared the Lord, and they believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses.
EXO 15:1 Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the Lord. They said, “I will sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and its rider he has thrown into the sea.
EXO 15:2 The Lord is my strength and my song, and he has become my salvation. This is my God, and I will praise him, my father’s God, and I will exalt him.
EXO 15:3 The Lord is a warrior, the Lord is his name.
EXO 15:4 The chariots of Pharaoh and his army he has thrown into the sea, and his chosen officers were drowned in the Red Sea.
EXO 15:5 The depths have covered them, they went down to the bottom like a stone.
EXO 15:6 Your right hand, O Lord, was majestic in power, your right hand, O Lord, shattered the enemy.
EXO 15:7 In the abundance of your majesty you have overthrown those who rise up against you. You sent forth your wrath; it consumed them like stubble.
EXO 15:8 By the blast of your nostrils the waters were piled up, the flowing water stood upright like a heap, and the deep waters were solidified in the heart of the sea.
EXO 15:9 The enemy said, ‘I will chase, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my desire will be satisfied on them. I will draw my sword, my hand will destroy them.’
EXO 15:10 But you blew with your breath, and the sea covered them. They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
EXO 15:11 Who is like you, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like you? – majestic in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders?
EXO 15:12 You stretched out your right hand, the earth swallowed them.
EXO 15:13 By your loyal love you will lead the people whom you have redeemed; you will guide them by your strength to your holy dwelling place.
EXO 15:14 The nations will hear and tremble; anguish will seize the inhabitants of Philistia.
EXO 15:15 Then the chiefs of Edom will be terrified, trembling will seize the leaders of Moab, and the inhabitants of Canaan will shake.
EXO 15:16 Fear and dread will fall on them; by the greatness of your arm they will be as still as stone until your people pass by, O Lord, until the people whom you have bought pass by.
EXO 15:17 You will bring them in and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance, in the place you made for your residence, O Lord, the sanctuary, O Lord, that your hands have established.
EXO 15:18 The Lord will reign forever and ever!
EXO 15:19 For the horses of Pharaoh came with his chariots and his footmen into the sea, and the Lord brought back the waters of the sea on them, but the Israelites walked on dry land in the middle of the sea.”
EXO 15:20 Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a hand-drum in her hand, and all the women went out after her with hand-drums and with dances.
EXO 15:21 Miriam sang in response to them, “Sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and its rider he has thrown into the sea.”
EXO 15:22 Then Moses led Israel to journey away from the Red Sea. They went out to the Desert of Shur, walked for three days into the desert, and found no water.
EXO 15:23 Then they came to Marah, but they were not able to drink the waters of Marah, because they were bitter. (That is why its name was Marah.)
EXO 15:24 So the people murmured against Moses, saying, “What can we drink?”
EXO 15:25 He cried out to the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree. When Moses threw it into the water, the water became safe to drink. There the Lord made for them a binding ordinance, and there he tested them.
EXO 15:26 He said, “If you will diligently obey the Lord your God, and do what is right in his sight, and pay attention to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, then all the diseases that I brought on the Egyptians I will not bring on you, for I, the Lord, am your healer.”
EXO 15:27 Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve wells of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there by the water.
EXO 16:1 When they journeyed from Elim, the entire company of Israelites came to the Desert of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their exodus from the land of Egypt.
EXO 16:2 The entire company of Israelites murmured against Moses and Aaron in the desert.
EXO 16:3 The Israelites said to them, “If only we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the pots of meat, when we ate bread to the full, for you have brought us out into this desert to kill this whole assembly with hunger!”
EXO 16:4 Then the Lord said to Moses, “I am going to rain bread from heaven for you, and the people will go out and gather the amount for each day, so that I may test them. Will they walk in my law or not?
EXO 16:5 On the sixth day they will prepare what they bring in, and it will be twice as much as they gather every other day.”
EXO 16:6 Moses and Aaron said to all the Israelites, “In the evening you will know that the Lord has brought you out of the land of Egypt,
EXO 16:7 and in the morning you will see the glory of the Lord, because he has heard your murmurings against the Lord. As for us, what are we, that you should murmur against us?”
EXO 16:8 Moses said, “You will know this when the Lord gives you meat to eat in the evening and bread in the morning to satisfy you, because the Lord has heard your murmurings that you are murmuring against him. As for us, what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.”
EXO 16:9 Then Moses said to Aaron, “Tell the whole community of the Israelites, ‘Come before the Lord, because he has heard your murmurings.’”
EXO 16:10 As Aaron spoke to the whole community of the Israelites and they looked toward the desert, there the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud,
EXO 16:11 and the Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 16:12 “I have heard the murmurings of the Israelites. Tell them, ‘During the evening you will eat meat, and in the morning you will be satisfied with bread, so that you may know that I am the Lord your God.’”
EXO 16:13 In the evening the quail came up and covered the camp, and in the morning a layer of dew was all around the camp.
EXO 16:14 When the layer of dew had evaporated, there on the surface of the desert was a thin flaky substance, thin like frost on the earth.
EXO 16:15 When the Israelites saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” because they did not know what it was. Moses said to them, “It is the bread that the Lord has given you for food.
EXO 16:16 “This is what the Lord has commanded: ‘Each person is to gather from it what he can eat, an omer per person according to the number of your people; each one will pick it up for whoever lives in his tent.’”
EXO 16:17 The Israelites did so, and they gathered – some more, some less.
EXO 16:18 When they measured with an omer, the one who gathered much had nothing left over, and the one who gathered little lacked nothing; each one had gathered what he could eat.
EXO 16:19 Moses said to them, “No one is to keep any of it until morning.”
EXO 16:20 But they did not listen to Moses; some kept part of it until morning, and it was full of worms and began to stink, and Moses was angry with them.
EXO 16:21 So they gathered it each morning, each person according to what he could eat, and when the sun got hot, it would melt.
EXO 16:22 And on the sixth day they gathered twice as much food, two omers per person; and all the leaders of the community came and told Moses.
EXO 16:23 He said to them, “This is what the Lord has said: ‘Tomorrow is a time of cessation from work, a holy Sabbath to the Lord. Whatever you want to bake, bake today; whatever you want to boil, boil today; whatever is left put aside for yourselves to be kept until morning.’”
EXO 16:24 So they put it aside until the morning, just as Moses had commanded, and it did not stink, nor were there any worms in it.
EXO 16:25 Moses said, “Eat it today, for today is a Sabbath to the Lord; today you will not find it in the area.
EXO 16:26 Six days you will gather it, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath, there will not be any.”
EXO 16:27 On the seventh day some of the people went out to gather it, but they found nothing.
EXO 16:28 So the Lord said to Moses, “How long do you refuse to obey my commandments and my instructions?
EXO 16:29 See, because the Lord has given you the Sabbath, that is why he is giving you food for two days on the sixth day. Each of you stay where you are; let no one go out of his place on the seventh day.”
EXO 16:30 So the people rested on the seventh day.
EXO 16:31 The house of Israel called its name “manna.” It was like coriander seed and was white, and it tasted like wafers with honey.
EXO 16:32 Moses said, “This is what the Lord has commanded: ‘Fill an omer with it to be kept for generations to come, so that they may see the food I fed you in the desert when I brought you out from the land of Egypt.’”
EXO 16:33 Moses said to Aaron, “Take a jar and put in it an omer full of manna, and place it before the Lord to be kept for generations to come.”
EXO 16:34 Just as the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron placed it before the Testimony for safekeeping.
EXO 16:35 Now the Israelites ate manna forty years, until they came to a land that was inhabited; they ate manna until they came to the border of the land of Canaan.
EXO 16:36 (Now an omer is one tenth of an ephah.)
EXO 17:1 The whole community of the Israelites traveled on their journey from the Desert of Sin according to the Lord’s instruction, and they pitched camp in Rephidim. Now there was no water for the people to drink.
EXO 17:2 So the people contended with Moses, and they said, “Give us water to drink!” Moses said to them, “Why do you contend with me? Why do you test the Lord?”
EXO 17:3 But the people were very thirsty there for water, and they murmured against Moses and said, “Why in the world did you bring us up out of Egypt – to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?”
EXO 17:4 Then Moses cried out to the Lord, “What will I do with this people? – a little more and they will stone me!”
EXO 17:5 The Lord said to Moses, “Go over before the people; take with you some of the elders of Israel and take in your hand your staff with which you struck the Nile and go.
EXO 17:6 I will be standing before you there on the rock in Horeb, and you will strike the rock, and water will come out of it so that the people may drink.” And Moses did so in plain view of the elders of Israel.
EXO 17:7 He called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the contending of the Israelites and because of their testing the Lord, saying, “Is the Lord among us or not?”
EXO 17:8 Amalek came and attacked Israel in Rephidim.
EXO 17:9 So Moses said to Joshua, “Choose some of our men and go out, fight against Amalek. Tomorrow I will stand on top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand.”
EXO 17:10 So Joshua fought against Amalek just as Moses had instructed him; and Moses and Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
EXO 17:11 Whenever Moses would raise his hands, then Israel prevailed, but whenever he would rest his hands, then Amalek prevailed.
EXO 17:12 When the hands of Moses became heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and Aaron and Hur held up his hands, one on one side and one on the other, and so his hands were steady until the sun went down.
EXO 17:13 So Joshua destroyed Amalek and his army with the sword.
EXO 17:14 The Lord said to Moses, “Write this as a memorial in the book, and rehearse it in Joshua’s hearing; for I will surely wipe out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
EXO 17:15 Moses built an altar, and he called it “The Lord is my Banner,”
EXO 17:16 for he said, “For a hand was lifted up to the throne of the Lord – that the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.”
EXO 18:1 Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard about all that God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, that the Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt.
EXO 18:2 Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took Moses’ wife Zipporah after he had sent her back,
EXO 18:3 and her two sons, one of whom was named Gershom (for Moses had said, “I have been a foreigner in a foreign land”),
EXO 18:4 and the other Eliezer (for Moses had said, “The God of my father has been my help and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh”).
EXO 18:5 Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, together with Moses’ sons and his wife, came to Moses in the desert where he was camping by the mountain of God.
EXO 18:6 He said to Moses, “I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you, along with your wife and her two sons with her.”
EXO 18:7 Moses went out to meet his father-in-law and bowed down and kissed him; they each asked about the other’s welfare, and then they went into the tent.
EXO 18:8 Moses told his father-in-law all that the Lord had done to Pharaoh and to Egypt for Israel’s sake, and all the hardship that had come on them along the way, and how the Lord had delivered them.
EXO 18:9 Jethro rejoiced because of all the good that the Lord had done for Israel, whom he had delivered from the hand of Egypt.
EXO 18:10 Jethro said, “Blessed be the Lord who has delivered you from the hand of Egypt, and from the hand of Pharaoh, who has delivered the people from the Egyptians’ control!
EXO 18:11 Now I know that the Lord is greater than all the gods, for in the thing in which they dealt proudly against them he has destroyed them.”
EXO 18:12 Then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat food with the father-in-law of Moses before God.
EXO 18:13 On the next day Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood around Moses from morning until evening.
EXO 18:14 When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why are you sitting by yourself, and all the people stand around you from morning until evening?”
EXO 18:15 Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to inquire of God.
EXO 18:16 When they have a dispute, it comes to me and I decide between a man and his neighbor, and I make known the decrees of God and his laws.”
EXO 18:17 Moses’ father-in-law said to him, “What you are doing is not good!
EXO 18:18 You will surely wear out, both you and these people who are with you, for this is too heavy a burden for you; you are not able to do it by yourself.
EXO 18:19 Now listen to me, I will give you advice, and may God be with you: You be a representative for the people to God, and you bring their disputes to God;
EXO 18:20 warn them of the statutes and the laws, and make known to them the way in which they must walk and the work they must do.
EXO 18:21 But you choose from the people capable men, God-fearing, men of truth, those who hate bribes, and put them over the people as rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
EXO 18:22 They will judge the people under normal circumstances, and every difficult case they will bring to you, but every small case they themselves will judge, so that you may make it easier for yourself, and they will bear the burden with you.
EXO 18:23 If you do this thing, and God so commands you, then you will be able to endure, and all these people will be able to go home satisfied.”
EXO 18:24 Moses listened to his father-in-law and did everything he had said.
EXO 18:25 Moses chose capable men from all Israel, and he made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
EXO 18:26 They judged the people under normal circumstances; the difficult cases they would bring to Moses, but every small case they would judge themselves.
EXO 18:27 Then Moses sent his father-in-law on his way, and so Jethro went to his own land.
EXO 19:1 In the third month after the Israelites went out from the land of Egypt, on the very day, they came to the Desert of Sinai.
EXO 19:2 After they journeyed from Rephidim, they came to the Desert of Sinai, and they camped in the desert; Israel camped there in front of the mountain.
EXO 19:3 Moses went up to God, and the Lord called to him from the mountain, “Thus you will tell the house of Jacob, and declare to the people of Israel:
EXO 19:4 ‘You yourselves have seen what I did to Egypt and how I lifted you on eagles’ wings and brought you to myself.
EXO 19:5 And now, if you will diligently listen to me and keep my covenant, then you will be my special possession out of all the nations, for all the earth is mine,
EXO 19:6 and you will be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you will speak to the Israelites.”
EXO 19:7 So Moses came and summoned the elders of Israel. He set before them all these words that the Lord had commanded him,
EXO 19:8 and all the people answered together, “All that the Lord has commanded we will do!” So Moses brought the words of the people back to the Lord.
EXO 19:9 The Lord said to Moses, “I am going to come to you in a dense cloud, so that the people may hear when I speak with you and so that they will always believe in you.” And Moses told the words of the people to the Lord.
EXO 19:10 The Lord said to Moses, “Go to the people and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and make them wash their clothes
EXO 19:11 and be ready for the third day, for on the third day the Lord will come down on Mount Sinai in the sight of all the people.
EXO 19:12 You must set boundaries for the people all around, saying, ‘Take heed to yourselves not to go up on the mountain nor touch its edge. Whoever touches the mountain will surely be put to death!
EXO 19:13 No hand will touch him – but he will surely be stoned or shot through, whether a beast or a human being; he must not live.’ When the ram’s horn sounds a long blast they may go up on the mountain.”
EXO 19:14 Then Moses went down from the mountain to the people and sanctified the people, and they washed their clothes.
EXO 19:15 He said to the people, “Be ready for the third day. Do not go near your wives.”
EXO 19:16 On the third day in the morning there was thunder and lightning and a dense cloud on the mountain, and the sound of a very loud horn; all the people who were in the camp trembled.
EXO 19:17 Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet God, and they took their place at the foot of the mountain.
EXO 19:18 Now Mount Sinai was completely covered with smoke because the Lord had descended on it in fire, and its smoke went up like the smoke of a great furnace, and the whole mountain shook violently.
EXO 19:19 When the sound of the horn grew louder and louder, Moses was speaking and God was answering him with a voice.
EXO 19:20 The Lord came down on Mount Sinai, on the top of the mountain, and the Lord summoned Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up.
EXO 19:21 The Lord said to Moses, “Go down and solemnly warn the people, lest they force their way through to the Lord to look, and many of them perish.
EXO 19:22 Let the priests also, who approach the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break through against them.”
EXO 19:23 Moses said to the Lord, “The people are not able to come up to Mount Sinai, because you solemnly warned us, ‘Set boundaries for the mountain and set it apart.’”
EXO 19:24 The Lord said to him, “Go, get down, and come up, and Aaron with you, but do not let the priests and the people force their way through to come up to the Lord, lest he break through against them.”
EXO 19:25 So Moses went down to the people and spoke to them.
EXO 20:1 God spoke all these words:
EXO 20:2 “I, the Lord, am your God, who brought you from the land of Egypt, from the house of slavery.
EXO 20:3 “You shall have no other gods before me.
EXO 20:4 “You shall not make for yourself a carved image or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above or that is on the earth beneath or that is in the water below.
EXO 20:5 You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for I, the Lord, your God, am a jealous God, responding to the transgression of fathers by dealing with children to the third and fourth generations of those who reject me,
EXO 20:6 and showing covenant faithfulness to a thousand generations of those who love me and keep my commandments.
EXO 20:7 “You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain, for the Lord will not hold guiltless anyone who takes his name in vain.
EXO 20:8 “Remember the Sabbath day to set it apart as holy.
EXO 20:9 For six days you may labor and do all your work,
EXO 20:10 but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God; on it you shall not do any work, you, or your son, or your daughter, or your male servant, or your female servant, or your cattle, or the resident foreigner who is in your gates.
EXO 20:11 For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth and the sea and all that is in them, and he rested on the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and set it apart as holy.
EXO 20:12 “Honor your father and your mother, that you may live a long time in the land the Lord your God is giving to you.
EXO 20:13 “You shall not murder.
EXO 20:14 “You shall not commit adultery.
EXO 20:15 “You shall not steal.
EXO 20:16 “You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor.
EXO 20:17 “You shall not covet your neighbor’s house. You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife, nor his male servant, nor his female servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, nor anything that belongs to your neighbor.”
EXO 20:18 All the people were seeing the thundering and the lightning, and heard the sound of the horn, and saw the mountain smoking – and when the people saw it they trembled with fear and kept their distance.
EXO 20:19 They said to Moses, “You speak to us and we will listen, but do not let God speak with us, lest we die.”
EXO 20:20 Moses said to the people, “Do not fear, for God has come to test you, that the fear of him may be before you so that you do not sin.”
EXO 20:21 The people kept their distance, but Moses drew near the thick darkness where God was.
EXO 20:22 The Lord said to Moses: “Thus you will tell the Israelites: ‘You yourselves have seen that I have spoken with you from heaven.
EXO 20:23 You must not make gods of silver alongside me, nor make gods of gold for yourselves.
EXO 20:24 ‘You must make for me an altar made of earth, and you will sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your peace offerings, your sheep and your cattle. In every place where I cause my name to be honored I will come to you and I will bless you.
EXO 20:25 If you make me an altar of stone, you must not build it of stones shaped with tools, for if you use your tool on it you have defiled it.
EXO 20:26 And you must not go up by steps to my altar, so that your nakedness is not exposed.’
EXO 21:1 “These are the decisions that you will set before them:
EXO 21:2 “If you buy a Hebrew servant, he is to serve you for six years, but in the seventh year he will go out free without paying anything.
EXO 21:3 If he came in by himself he will go out by himself; if he had a wife when he came in, then his wife will go out with him.
EXO 21:4 If his master gave him a wife, and she bore sons or daughters, the wife and the children will belong to her master, and he will go out by himself.
EXO 21:5 But if the servant should declare, ‘I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free,’
EXO 21:6 then his master must bring him to the judges, and he will bring him to the door or the doorposts, and his master will pierce his ear with an awl, and he shall serve him forever.
EXO 21:7 “If a man sells his daughter as a female servant, she will not go out as the male servants do.
EXO 21:8 If she does not please her master, who has designated her for himself, then he must let her be redeemed. He has no right to sell her to a foreign nation, because he has dealt deceitfully with her.
EXO 21:9 If he designated her for his son, then he will deal with her according to the customary rights of daughters.
EXO 21:10 If he takes another wife, he must not diminish the first one’s food, her clothing, or her marital rights.
EXO 21:11 If he does not provide her with these three things, then she will go out free, without paying money.
EXO 21:12 “Whoever strikes someone so that he dies must surely be put to death.
EXO 21:13 But if he does not do it with premeditation, but it happens by accident, then I will appoint for you a place where he may flee.
EXO 21:14 But if a man willfully attacks his neighbor to kill him cunningly, you will take him even from my altar that he may die.
EXO 21:15 “Whoever strikes his father or his mother must surely be put to death.
EXO 21:16 “Whoever kidnaps someone and sells him, or is caught still holding him, must surely be put to death.
EXO 21:17 “Whoever treats his father or his mother disgracefully must surely be put to death.
EXO 21:18 “If men fight, and one strikes his neighbor with a stone or with his fist and he does not die, but must remain in bed,
EXO 21:19 and then if he gets up and walks about outside on his staff, then the one who struck him is innocent, except he must pay for the injured person’s loss of time and see to it that he is fully healed.
EXO 21:20 “If a man strikes his male servant or his female servant with a staff so that he or she dies as a result of the blow, he will surely be punished.
EXO 21:21 However, if the injured servant survives one or two days, the owner will not be punished, for he has suffered the loss.
EXO 21:22 “If men fight and hit a pregnant woman and her child is born prematurely, but there is no serious injury, he will surely be punished in accordance with what the woman’s husband demands of him, and he will pay what the court decides.
EXO 21:23 But if there is serious injury, then you will give a life for a life,
EXO 21:24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
EXO 21:25 burn for burn, wound for wound, bruise for bruise.
EXO 21:26 “If a man strikes the eye of his male servant or his female servant so that he destroys it, he will let the servant go free as compensation for the eye.
EXO 21:27 If he knocks out the tooth of his male servant or his female servant, he will let the servant go free as compensation for the tooth.
EXO 21:28 “If an ox gores a man or a woman so that either dies, then the ox must surely be stoned and its flesh must not be eaten, but the owner of the ox will be acquitted.
EXO 21:29 But if the ox had the habit of goring, and its owner was warned, and he did not take the necessary precautions, and then it killed a man or a woman, the ox must be stoned and the man must be put to death.
EXO 21:30 If a ransom is set for him, then he must pay the redemption for his life according to whatever amount was set for him.
EXO 21:31 If the ox gores a son or a daughter, the owner will be dealt with according to this rule.
EXO 21:32 If the ox gores a male servant or a female servant, the owner must pay thirty shekels of silver, and the ox must be stoned.
EXO 21:33 “If a man opens a pit or if a man digs a pit and does not cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls into it,
EXO 21:34 the owner of the pit must repay the loss. He must give money to its owner, and the dead animal will become his.
EXO 21:35 If the ox of one man injures the ox of his neighbor so that it dies, then they will sell the live ox and divide its proceeds, and they will also divide the dead ox.
EXO 21:36 Or if it is known that the ox had the habit of goring, and its owner did not take the necessary precautions, he must surely pay ox for ox, and the dead animal will become his.
EXO 22:1 “If a man steals an ox or a sheep and kills it or sells it, he must pay back five head of cattle for the ox, and four sheep for the one sheep.
EXO 22:2 “If a thief is caught breaking in and is struck so that he dies, there will be no blood guilt for him.
EXO 22:3 If the sun has risen on him, then there is blood guilt for him. A thief must surely make full restitution; if he has nothing, then he will be sold for his theft.
EXO 22:4 If the stolen item should in fact be found alive in his possession, whether it be an ox or a donkey or a sheep, he must pay back double.
EXO 22:5 “If a man grazes his livestock in a field or a vineyard, and he lets the livestock loose and they graze in the field of another man, he must make restitution from the best of his own field and the best of his own vineyard.
EXO 22:6 “If a fire breaks out and spreads to thorn bushes, so that stacked grain or standing grain or the whole field is consumed, the one who started the fire must surely make restitution.
EXO 22:7 “If a man gives his neighbor money or articles for safekeeping, and it is stolen from the man’s house, if the thief is caught, he must repay double.
EXO 22:8 If the thief is not caught, then the owner of the house will be brought before the judges to see whether he has laid his hand on his neighbor’s goods.
EXO 22:9 In all cases of illegal possessions, whether for an ox, a donkey, a sheep, a garment, or any kind of lost item, about which someone says ‘This belongs to me,’ the matter of the two of them will come before the judges, and the one whom the judges declare guilty must repay double to his neighbor.
EXO 22:10 If a man gives his neighbor a donkey or an ox or a sheep or any beast to keep, and it dies or is hurt or is carried away without anyone seeing it,
EXO 22:11 then there will be an oath to the Lord between the two of them, that he has not laid his hand on his neighbor’s goods, and its owner will accept this, and he will not have to pay.
EXO 22:12 But if it was stolen from him, he will pay its owner.
EXO 22:13 If it is torn in pieces, then he will bring it for evidence, and he will not have to pay for what was torn.
EXO 22:14 “If a man borrows an animal from his neighbor, and it is hurt or dies when its owner was not with it, the man who borrowed it will surely pay.
EXO 22:15 If its owner was with it, he will not have to pay; if it was hired, what was paid for the hire covers it.
EXO 22:16 “If a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged and has sexual relations with her, he must surely endow her to be his wife.
EXO 22:17 If her father refuses to give her to him, he must pay money for the bride price of virgins.
EXO 22:18 “You must not allow a sorceress to live.
EXO 22:19 “Whoever has sexual relations with a beast must surely be put to death.
EXO 22:20 “Whoever sacrifices to a god other than the Lord alone must be utterly destroyed.
EXO 22:21 “You must not wrong a foreigner nor oppress him, for you were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
EXO 22:22 “You must not afflict any widow or orphan.
EXO 22:23 If you afflict them in any way and they cry to me, I will surely hear their cry,
EXO 22:24 and my anger will burn and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives will be widows and your children will be fatherless.
EXO 22:25 “If you lend money to any of my people who are needy among you, do not be like a moneylender to him; do not charge him interest.
EXO 22:26 If you do take the garment of your neighbor in pledge, you must return it to him by the time the sun goes down,
EXO 22:27 for it is his only covering – it is his garment for his body. What else can he sleep in? And when he cries out to me, I will hear, for I am gracious.
EXO 22:28 “You must not blaspheme God or curse the ruler of your people.
EXO 22:29 “Do not hold back offerings from your granaries or your vats. You must give me the firstborn of your sons.
EXO 22:30 You must also do this for your oxen and for your sheep; seven days they may remain with their mothers, but give them to me on the eighth day.
EXO 22:31 “You will be holy people to me; you must not eat any meat torn by animals in the field. You must throw it to the dogs.
EXO 23:1 “You must not give a false report. Do not make common cause with the wicked to be a malicious witness.
EXO 23:2 “You must not follow a crowd in doing evil things; in a lawsuit you must not offer testimony that agrees with a crowd so as to pervert justice,
EXO 23:3 and you must not show partiality to a poor man in his lawsuit.
EXO 23:4 “If you encounter your enemy’s ox or donkey wandering off, you must by all means return it to him.
EXO 23:5 If you see the donkey of someone who hates you fallen under its load, you must not ignore him, but be sure to help him with it.
EXO 23:6 “You must not turn away justice for your poor people in their lawsuits.
EXO 23:7 Keep your distance from a false charge – do not kill the innocent and the righteous, for I will not justify the wicked.
EXO 23:8 “You must not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds those who see and subverts the words of the righteous.
EXO 23:9 “You must not oppress a foreigner, since you know the life of a foreigner, for you were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
EXO 23:10 “For six years you are to sow your land and gather in its produce.
EXO 23:11 But in the seventh year you must let it lie fallow and leave it alone so that the poor of your people may eat, and what they leave any animal in the field may eat; you must do likewise with your vineyard and your olive grove.
EXO 23:12 For six days you are to do your work, but on the seventh day you must cease, in order that your ox and your donkey may rest and that your female servant’s son and any hired help may refresh themselves.
EXO 23:13 “Pay attention to do everything I have told you, and do not even mention the names of other gods – do not let them be heard on your lips.
EXO 23:14 “Three times in the year you must make a pilgrim feast to me.
EXO 23:15 You are to observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread; seven days you must eat bread made without yeast, as I commanded you, at the appointed time of the month of Abib, for at that time you came out of Egypt. No one may appear before me empty-handed.
EXO 23:16 “You are also to observe the Feast of Harvest, the firstfruits of your labors that you have sown in the field, and the Feast of Ingathering at the end of the year when you have gathered in your harvest out of the field.
EXO 23:17 At three times in the year all your males will appear before the Lord God.
EXO 23:18 “You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice with bread containing yeast; the fat of my festal sacrifice must not remain until morning.
EXO 23:19 The first of the firstfruits of your soil you must bring to the house of the Lord your God. “You must not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.
EXO 23:20 “I am going to send an angel before you to protect you as you journey and to bring you into the place that I have prepared.
EXO 23:21 Take heed because of him, and obey his voice; do not rebel against him, for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name is in him.
EXO 23:22 But if you diligently obey him and do all that I command, then I will be an enemy to your enemies, and I will be an adversary to your adversaries.
EXO 23:23 For my angel will go before you and bring you to the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, and I will destroy them completely.
EXO 23:24 “You must not bow down to their gods; you must not serve them or do according to their practices. Instead you must completely overthrow them and smash their standing stones to pieces.
EXO 23:25 You must serve the Lord your God, and he will bless your bread and your water, and I will remove sickness from your midst.
EXO 23:26 No woman will miscarry her young or be barren in your land. I will fulfill the number of your days.
EXO 23:27 “I will send my terror before you, and I will destroy all the people whom you encounter; I will make all your enemies turn their backs to you.
EXO 23:28 I will send hornets before you that will drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite before you.
EXO 23:29 I will not drive them out before you in one year, lest the land become desolate and the wild animals multiply against you.
EXO 23:30 Little by little I will drive them out before you, until you become fruitful and inherit the land.
EXO 23:31 I will set your boundaries from the Red Sea to the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert to the River, for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and you will drive them out before you.
EXO 23:32 “You must make no covenant with them or with their gods.
EXO 23:33 They must not live in your land, lest they make you sin against me, for if you serve their gods, it will surely be a snare to you.”
EXO 24:1 But to Moses the Lord said, “Come up to the Lord, you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and worship from a distance.
EXO 24:2 Moses alone may come near the Lord, but the others must not come near, nor may the people go up with him.”
EXO 24:3 Moses came and told the people all the Lord’s words and all the decisions. All the people answered together, “We are willing to do all the words that the Lord has said,”
EXO 24:4 and Moses wrote down all the words of the Lord. Early in the morning he built an altar at the foot of the mountain and arranged twelve standing stones – according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
EXO 24:5 He sent young Israelite men, and they offered burnt offerings and sacrificed young bulls for peace offerings to the Lord.
EXO 24:6 Moses took half of the blood and put it in bowls, and half of the blood he splashed on the altar.
EXO 24:7 He took the Book of the Covenant and read it aloud to the people, and they said, “We are willing to do and obey all that the Lord has spoken.”
EXO 24:8 So Moses took the blood and splashed it on the people and said, “This is the blood of the covenant that the Lord has made with you in accordance with all these words.”
EXO 24:9 Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel went up,
EXO 24:10 and they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet there was something like a pavement made of sapphire, clear like the sky itself.
EXO 24:11 But he did not lay a hand on the leaders of the Israelites, so they saw God, and they ate and they drank.
EXO 24:12 The Lord said to Moses, “Come up to me to the mountain and remain there, and I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commandments that I have written, so that you may teach them.”
EXO 24:13 So Moses set out with Joshua his attendant, and Moses went up the mountain of God.
EXO 24:14 He told the elders, “Wait for us in this place until we return to you. Here are Aaron and Hur with you. Whoever has any matters of dispute can approach them.”
EXO 24:15 Moses went up the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain.
EXO 24:16 The glory of the Lord resided on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days. On the seventh day he called to Moses from within the cloud.
EXO 24:17 Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain in plain view of the people.
EXO 24:18 Moses went into the cloud when he went up the mountain, and Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.
EXO 25:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 25:2 “Tell the Israelites to take an offering for me; from every person motivated by a willing heart you are to receive my offering.
EXO 25:3 This is the offering you are to accept from them: gold, silver, bronze,
EXO 25:4 blue, purple, scarlet, fine linen, goat’s hair,
EXO 25:5 ram skins dyed red, fine leather, acacia wood,
EXO 25:6 oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for fragrant incense,
EXO 25:7 onyx stones, and other gems to be set in the ephod and in the breastpiece.
EXO 25:8 Let them make for me a sanctuary, so that I may live among them.
EXO 25:9 According to all that I am showing you – the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of all its furnishings – you must make it exactly so.
EXO 25:10 “They are to make an ark of acacia wood – its length is to be three feet nine inches, its width two feet three inches, and its height two feet three inches.
EXO 25:11 You are to overlay it with pure gold – both inside and outside you must overlay it, and you are to make a surrounding border of gold over it.
EXO 25:12 You are to cast four gold rings for it and put them on its four feet, with two rings on one side and two rings on the other side.
EXO 25:13 You are to make poles of acacia wood, overlay them with gold,
EXO 25:14 and put the poles into the rings at the sides of the ark in order to carry the ark with them.
EXO 25:15 The poles must remain in the rings of the ark; they must not be removed from it.
EXO 25:16 You are to put into the ark the testimony that I will give to you.
EXO 25:17 “You are to make an atonement lid of pure gold; its length is to be three feet nine inches, and its width is to be two feet three inches.
EXO 25:18 You are to make two cherubim of gold; you are to make them of hammered metal on the two ends of the atonement lid.
EXO 25:19 Make one cherub on one end and one cherub on the other end; from the atonement lid you are to make the cherubim on the two ends.
EXO 25:20 The cherubim are to be spreading their wings upward, overshadowing the atonement lid with their wings, and the cherubim are to face each other, looking toward the atonement lid.
EXO 25:21 You are to put the atonement lid on top of the ark, and in the ark you are to put the testimony I am giving you.
EXO 25:22 I will meet with you there, and from above the atonement lid, from between the two cherubim that are over the ark of the testimony, I will speak with you about all that I will command you for the Israelites.
EXO 25:23 “You are to make a table of acacia wood; its length is to be three feet, its width one foot six inches, and its height two feet three inches.
EXO 25:24 You are to overlay it with pure gold, and you are to make a surrounding border of gold for it.
EXO 25:25 You are to make a surrounding frame for it about three inches broad, and you are to make a surrounding border of gold for its frame.
EXO 25:26 You are to make four rings of gold for it and attach the rings at the four corners where its four legs are.
EXO 25:27 The rings are to be close to the frame to provide places for the poles to carry the table.
EXO 25:28 You are to make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, so that the table may be carried with them.
EXO 25:29 You are to make its plates, its ladles, its pitchers, and its bowls, to be used in pouring out offerings; you are to make them of pure gold.
EXO 25:30 You are to set the Bread of the Presence on the table before me continually.
EXO 25:31 “You are to make a lampstand of pure gold. The lampstand is to be made of hammered metal; its base and its shaft, its cups, its buds, and its blossoms are to be from the same piece.
EXO 25:32 Six branches are to extend from the sides of the lampstand, three branches of the lampstand from one side of it and three branches of the lampstand from the other side of it.
EXO 25:33 Three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms are to be on one branch, and three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms are to be on the next branch, and the same for the six branches extending from the lampstand.
EXO 25:34 On the lampstand there are to be four cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms,
EXO 25:35 with a bud under the first two branches from it, and a bud under the next two branches from it, and a bud under the third two branches from it, according to the six branches that extend from the lampstand.
EXO 25:36 Their buds and their branches will be one piece, all of it one hammered piece of pure gold.
EXO 25:37 “You are to make its seven lamps, and then set its lamps up on it, so that it will give light to the area in front of it.
EXO 25:38 Its trimmers and its trays are to be of pure gold.
EXO 25:39 About seventy-five pounds of pure gold is to be used for it and for all these utensils.
EXO 25:40 Now be sure to make them according to the pattern you were shown on the mountain.
EXO 26:1 “The tabernacle itself you are to make with ten curtains of fine twisted linen and blue and purple and scarlet; you are to make them with cherubim that are the work of an artistic designer.
EXO 26:2 The length of each curtain is to be forty-two feet, and the width of each curtain is to be six feet – the same size for each of the curtains.
EXO 26:3 Five curtains are to be joined, one to another, and the other five curtains are to be joined, one to another.
EXO 26:4 You are to make loops of blue material along the edge of the end curtain in one set, and in the same way you are to make loops in the outer edge of the end curtain in the second set.
EXO 26:5 You are to make fifty loops on the one curtain, and you are to make fifty loops on the end curtain which is on the second set, so that the loops are opposite one to another.
EXO 26:6 You are to make fifty gold clasps and join the curtains together with the clasps, so that the tabernacle is a unit.
EXO 26:7 “You are to make curtains of goats’ hair for a tent over the tabernacle; you are to make eleven curtains.
EXO 26:8 The length of each curtain is to be forty-five feet, and the width of each curtain is to be six feet – the same size for the eleven curtains.
EXO 26:9 You are to join five curtains by themselves and six curtains by themselves. You are to double over the sixth curtain at the front of the tent.
EXO 26:10 You are to make fifty loops along the edge of the end curtain in one set and fifty loops along the edge of the curtain that joins the second set.
EXO 26:11 You are to make fifty bronze clasps and put the clasps into the loops and join the tent together so that it is a unit.
EXO 26:12 Now the part that remains of the curtains of the tent – the half curtain that remains will hang over at the back of the tabernacle.
EXO 26:13 The foot and a half on the one side and the foot and a half on the other side of what remains in the length of the curtains of the tent will hang over the sides of the tabernacle, on one side and the other side, to cover it.
EXO 26:14 “You are to make a covering for the tent out of ram skins dyed red and over that a covering of fine leather.
EXO 26:15 “You are to make the frames for the tabernacle out of acacia wood as uprights.
EXO 26:16 Each frame is to be fifteen feet long, and each frame is to be two feet three inches wide,
EXO 26:17 with two projections per frame parallel one to another. You are to make all the frames of the tabernacle in this way.
EXO 26:18 So you are to make the frames for the tabernacle: twenty frames for the south side,
EXO 26:19 and you are to make forty silver bases to go under the twenty frames – two bases under the first frame for its two projections, and likewise two bases under the next frame for its two projections;
EXO 26:20 and for the second side of the tabernacle, the north side, twenty frames,
EXO 26:21 and their forty silver bases, two bases under the first frame, and two bases under the next frame.
EXO 26:22 And for the back of the tabernacle on the west you will make six frames.
EXO 26:23 You are to make two frames for the corners of the tabernacle on the back.
EXO 26:24 At the two corners they must be doubled at the lower end and finished together at the top in one ring. So it will be for both.
EXO 26:25 So there are to be eight frames and their silver bases, sixteen bases, two bases under the first frame, and two bases under the next frame.
EXO 26:26 “You are to make bars of acacia wood, five for the frames on one side of the tabernacle,
EXO 26:27 and five bars for the frames on the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the frames on the back of the tabernacle on the west.
EXO 26:28 The middle bar in the center of the frames will reach from end to end.
EXO 26:29 You are to overlay the frames with gold and make their rings of gold to provide places for the bars, and you are to overlay the bars with gold.
EXO 26:30 You are to set up the tabernacle according to the plan that you were shown on the mountain.
EXO 26:31 “You are to make a special curtain of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twisted linen; it is to be made with cherubim, the work of an artistic designer.
EXO 26:32 You are to hang it with gold hooks on four posts of acacia wood overlaid with gold, set in four silver bases.
EXO 26:33 You are to hang this curtain under the clasps and bring the ark of the testimony in there behind the curtain. The curtain will make a division for you between the Holy Place and the Most Holy Place.
EXO 26:34 You are to put the atonement lid on the ark of the testimony in the Most Holy Place.
EXO 26:35 You are to put the table outside the curtain and the lampstand on the south side of the tabernacle, opposite the table, and you are to place the table on the north side.
EXO 26:36 “You are to make a hanging for the entrance of the tent of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twined linen, the work of an embroiderer.
EXO 26:37 You are to make for the hanging five posts of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, and their hooks will be gold, and you are to cast five bronze bases for them.
EXO 27:1 “You are to make the altar of acacia wood, seven feet six inches long, and seven feet six inches wide; the altar is to be square, and its height is to be four feet six inches.
EXO 27:2 You are to make its four horns on its four corners; its horns will be part of it, and you are to overlay it with bronze.
EXO 27:3 You are to make its pots for the ashes, its shovels, its tossing bowls, its meat hooks, and its fire pans – you are to make all its utensils of bronze.
EXO 27:4 You are to make a grating for it, a network of bronze, and you are to make on the network four bronze rings on its four corners.
EXO 27:5 You are to put it under the ledge of the altar below, so that the network will come halfway up the altar.
EXO 27:6 You are to make poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, and you are to overlay them with bronze.
EXO 27:7 The poles are to be put into the rings so that the poles will be on two sides of the altar when carrying it.
EXO 27:8 You are to make the altar hollow, out of boards. Just as it was shown you on the mountain, so they must make it.
EXO 27:9 “You are to make the courtyard of the tabernacle. For the south side there are to be hangings for the courtyard of fine twisted linen, one hundred fifty feet long for one side,
EXO 27:10 with twenty posts and their twenty bronze bases, with the hooks of the posts and their bands of silver.
EXO 27:11 Likewise for its length on the north side, there are to be hangings for one hundred fifty feet, with twenty posts and their twenty bronze bases, with silver hooks and bands on the posts.
EXO 27:12 The width of the court on the west side is to be seventy-five feet with hangings, with their ten posts and their ten bases.
EXO 27:13 The width of the court on the east side, toward the sunrise, is to be seventy-five feet.
EXO 27:14 The hangings on one side of the gate are to be twenty-two and a half feet long, with their three posts and their three bases.
EXO 27:15 On the second side there are to be hangings twenty-two and a half feet long, with their three posts and their three bases.
EXO 27:16 For the gate of the courtyard there is to be a curtain of thirty feet, of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twined linen, the work of an embroiderer, with four posts and their four bases.
EXO 27:17 All the posts around the courtyard are to have silver bands; their hooks are to be silver, and their bases bronze.
EXO 27:18 The length of the courtyard is to be one hundred fifty feet and the width seventy-five feet, and the height of the fine twisted linen hangings is to be seven and a half feet, with their bronze bases.
EXO 27:19 All the utensils of the tabernacle used in all its service, all its tent pegs, and all the tent pegs of the courtyard are to be made of bronze.
EXO 27:20 “You are to command the Israelites that they bring to you pure oil of pressed olives for the light, so that the lamps will burn regularly.
EXO 27:21 In the tent of meeting outside the curtain that is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons are to arrange it from evening to morning before the Lord. This is to be a lasting ordinance among the Israelites for generations to come.
EXO 28:1 “And you, bring near to you your brother Aaron and his sons with him from among the Israelites, so that they may minister as my priests – Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.
EXO 28:2 You must make holy garments for your brother Aaron, for glory and for beauty.
EXO 28:3 You are to speak to all who are specially skilled, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, so that they may make Aaron’s garments to set him apart to minister as my priest.
EXO 28:4 Now these are the garments that they are to make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a fitted tunic, a turban, and a sash. They are to make holy garments for your brother Aaron and for his sons, that they may minister as my priests.
EXO 28:5 The artisans are to use the gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine linen.
EXO 28:6 “They are to make the ephod of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, the work of an artistic designer.
EXO 28:7 It is to have two shoulder pieces attached to two of its corners, so it can be joined together.
EXO 28:8 The artistically woven waistband of the ephod that is on it is to be like it, of one piece with the ephod, of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen.
EXO 28:9 “You are to take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel,
EXO 28:10 six of their names on one stone, and the six remaining names on the second stone, according to the order of their birth.
EXO 28:11 You are to engrave the two stones with the names of the sons of Israel with the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a seal; you are to have them set in gold filigree settings.
EXO 28:12 You are to put the two stones on the shoulders of the ephod, stones of memorial for the sons of Israel, and Aaron will bear their names before the Lord on his two shoulders for a memorial.
EXO 28:13 You are to make filigree settings of gold
EXO 28:14 and two braided chains of pure gold, like a cord, and attach the chains to the settings.
EXO 28:15 “You are to make a breastpiece for use in making decisions, the work of an artistic designer; you are to make it in the same fashion as the ephod; you are to make it of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen.
EXO 28:16 It is to be square when doubled, nine inches long and nine inches wide.
EXO 28:17 You are to set in it a setting for stones, four rows of stones, a row with a ruby, a topaz, and a beryl – the first row;
EXO 28:18 and the second row, a turquoise, a sapphire, and an emerald;
EXO 28:19 and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;
EXO 28:20 and the fourth row, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper. They are to be enclosed in gold in their filigree settings.
EXO 28:21 The stones are to be for the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to the number of their names. Each name according to the twelve tribes is to be like the engravings of a seal.
EXO 28:22 “You are to make for the breastpiece braided chains like cords of pure gold,
EXO 28:23 and you are to make for the breastpiece two gold rings and attach the two rings to the upper two ends of the breastpiece.
EXO 28:24 You are to attach the two gold chains to the two rings at the ends of the breastpiece;
EXO 28:25 the other two ends of the two chains you will attach to the two settings and then attach them to the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front of it.
EXO 28:26 You are to make two rings of gold and put them on the other two ends of the breastpiece, on its edge that is on the inner side of the ephod.
EXO 28:27 You are to make two more gold rings and attach them to the bottom of the two shoulder pieces on the front of the ephod, close to the juncture above the waistband of the ephod.
EXO 28:28 They are to tie the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod by blue cord, so that it may be above the waistband of the ephod, and so that the breastpiece will not be loose from the ephod.
EXO 28:29 Aaron will bear the names of the sons of Israel in the breastpiece of decision over his heart when he goes into the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.
EXO 28:30 “You are to put the Urim and the Thummim into the breastpiece of decision; and they are to be over Aaron’s heart when he goes in before the Lord. Aaron is to bear the decisions of the Israelites over his heart before the Lord continually.
EXO 28:31 “You are to make the robe of the ephod completely blue.
EXO 28:32 There is to be an opening in its top in the center of it, with an edge all around the opening, the work of a weaver, like the opening of a collar, so that it cannot be torn.
EXO 28:33 You are to make pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet all around its hem and bells of gold between them all around.
EXO 28:34 The pattern is to be a gold bell and a pomegranate, a gold bell and a pomegranate, all around the hem of the robe.
EXO 28:35 The robe is to be on Aaron as he ministers, and his sound will be heard when he enters the Holy Place before the Lord and when he leaves, so that he does not die.
EXO 28:36 “You are to make a plate of pure gold and engrave on it the way a seal is engraved: “Holiness to the Lord.”
EXO 28:37 You are to attach to it a blue cord so that it will be on the turban; it is to be on the front of the turban,
EXO 28:38 It will be on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron will bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the Israelites are to sanctify by all their holy gifts; it will always be on his forehead, for their acceptance before the Lord.
EXO 28:39 You are to weave the tunic of fine linen and make the turban of fine linen, and make the sash the work of an embroiderer.
EXO 28:40 “For Aaron’s sons you are to make tunics, sashes, and headbands for glory and for beauty.
EXO 28:41 “You are to clothe them – your brother Aaron and his sons with him – and anoint them and ordain them and set them apart as holy, so that they may minister as my priests.
EXO 28:42 Make for them linen undergarments to cover their naked bodies; they must cover from the waist to the thighs.
EXO 28:43 These must be on Aaron and his sons when they enter to the tent of meeting, or when they approach the altar to minister in the Holy Place, so that they bear no iniquity and die. It is to be a perpetual ordinance for him and for his descendants after him.
EXO 29:1 “Now this is what you are to do for them to consecrate them so that they may minister as my priests. Take a young bull and two rams without blemish;
EXO 29:2 and bread made without yeast, and perforated cakes without yeast mixed with oil, and wafers without yeast spread with oil – you are to make them using fine wheat flour.
EXO 29:3 You are to put them in one basket and present them in the basket, along with the bull and the two rams.
EXO 29:4 “You are to present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the tent of meeting. You are to wash them with water
EXO 29:5 and take the garments and clothe Aaron with the tunic, the robe of the ephod, the ephod, and the breastpiece; you are to fasten the ephod on him by using the skillfully woven waistband.
EXO 29:6 You are to put the turban on his head and put the holy diadem on the turban.
EXO 29:7 You are to take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him.
EXO 29:8 You are to present his sons and clothe them with tunics
EXO 29:9 and wrap the sashes around Aaron and his sons and put headbands on them, and so the ministry of priesthood will belong to them by a perpetual ordinance. Thus you are to consecrate Aaron and his sons.
EXO 29:10 “You are to present the bull at the front of the tent of meeting, and Aaron and his sons are to put their hands on the head of the bull.
EXO 29:11 You are to kill the bull before the Lord at the entrance to the tent of meeting
EXO 29:12 and take some of the blood of the bull and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger; all the rest of the blood you are to pour out at the base of the altar.
EXO 29:13 You are to take all the fat that covers the entrails, and the lobe that is above the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and burn them on the altar.
EXO 29:14 But the meat of the bull, its skin, and its dung you are to burn up outside the camp. It is the purification offering.
EXO 29:15 “You are to take one ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head,
EXO 29:16 and you are to kill the ram and take its blood and splash it all around on the altar.
EXO 29:17 Then you are to cut the ram into pieces and wash the entrails and its legs and put them on its pieces and on its head
EXO 29:18 and burn the whole ram on the altar. It is a burnt offering to the Lord, a soothing aroma; it is an offering made by fire to the Lord.
EXO 29:19 “You are to take the second ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head,
EXO 29:20 and you are to kill the ram and take some of its blood and put it on the tip of the right ear of Aaron, on the tip of the right ear of his sons, on the thumb of their right hand, and on the big toe of their right foot, and then splash the blood all around on the altar.
EXO 29:21 You are to take some of the blood that is on the altar and some of the anointing oil and sprinkle it on Aaron, on his garments, on his sons, and on his sons’ garments with him, so that he may be holy, he and his garments along with his sons and his sons’ garments.
EXO 29:22 “You are to take from the ram the fat, the fat tail, the fat that covers the entrails, the lobe of the liver, the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and the right thigh – for it is the ram for consecration –
EXO 29:23 and one round flat cake of bread, one perforated cake of oiled bread, and one wafer from the basket of bread made without yeast that is before the Lord.
EXO 29:24 You are to put all these in Aaron’s hands and in his sons’ hands, and you are to wave them as a wave offering before the Lord.
EXO 29:25 Then you are to take them from their hands and burn them on the altar for a burnt offering, for a soothing aroma before the Lord. It is an offering made by fire to the Lord.
EXO 29:26 You are to take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s consecration; you are to wave it as a wave offering before the Lord, and it is to be your share.
EXO 29:27 You are to sanctify the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution, which were waved and lifted up as a contribution from the ram of consecration, from what belongs to Aaron and to his sons.
EXO 29:28 It is to belong to Aaron and to his sons from the Israelites, by a perpetual ordinance, for it is a contribution. It is to be a contribution from the Israelites from their peace offerings, their contribution to the Lord.
EXO 29:29 “The holy garments that belong to Aaron are to belong to his sons after him, so that they may be anointed in them and consecrated in them.
EXO 29:30 The priest who succeeds him from his sons, when he first comes to the tent of meeting to minister in the Holy Place, is to wear them for seven days.
EXO 29:31 “You are to take the ram of the consecration and cook its meat in a holy place.
EXO 29:32 Aaron and his sons are to eat the meat of the ram and the bread that was in the basket at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
EXO 29:33 They are to eat those things by which atonement was made to consecrate and to set them apart, but no one else may eat them, for they are holy.
EXO 29:34 If any of the meat from the consecration offerings or any of the bread is left over until morning, then you are to burn up what is left over. It must not be eaten, because it is holy.
EXO 29:35 “Thus you are to do for Aaron and for his sons, according to all that I have commanded you; you are to consecrate them for seven days.
EXO 29:36 Every day you are to prepare a bull for a purification offering for atonement. You are to purge the altar by making atonement for it, and you are to anoint it to set it apart as holy.
EXO 29:37 For seven days you are to make atonement for the altar and set it apart as holy. Then the altar will be most holy. Anything that touches the altar will be holy.
EXO 29:38 “Now this is what you are to prepare on the altar every day continually: two lambs a year old.
EXO 29:39 The first lamb you are to prepare in the morning, and the second lamb you are to prepare around sundown.
EXO 29:40 With the first lamb offer a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of oil from pressed olives, and a fourth of a hin of wine as a drink offering.
EXO 29:41 The second lamb you are to offer around sundown; you are to prepare for it the same meal offering as for the morning and the same drink offering, for a soothing aroma, an offering made by fire to the Lord.
EXO 29:42 “This will be a regular burnt offering throughout your generations at the entrance of the tent of meeting before the Lord, where I will meet with you to speak to you there.
EXO 29:43 There I will meet with the Israelites, and it will be set apart as holy by my glory.
EXO 29:44 “So I will set apart as holy the tent of meeting and the altar, and I will set apart as holy Aaron and his sons, that they may minister as priests to me.
EXO 29:45 I will reside among the Israelites, and I will be their God,
EXO 29:46 and they will know that I am the Lord their God, who brought them out from the land of Egypt, so that I may reside among them. I am the Lord their God.
EXO 30:1 “You are to make an altar for burning incense; you are to make it of acacia wood.
EXO 30:2 Its length is to be a foot and a half and its width a foot and a half; it will be square. Its height is to be three feet, with its horns of one piece with it.
EXO 30:3 You are to overlay it with pure gold – its top, its four walls, and its horns – and make a surrounding border of gold for it.
EXO 30:4 You are to make two gold rings for it under its border, on its two flanks; you are to make them on its two sides. The rings will be places for poles to carry it with.
EXO 30:5 You are to make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
EXO 30:6 “You are to put it in front of the curtain that is before the ark of the testimony (before the atonement lid that is over the testimony), where I will meet you.
EXO 30:7 Aaron is to burn sweet incense on it morning by morning; when he attends to the lamps he is to burn incense.
EXO 30:8 When Aaron sets up the lamps around sundown he is to burn incense on it; it is to be a regular incense offering before the Lord throughout your generations.
EXO 30:9 You must not offer strange incense on it, nor burnt offering, nor meal offering, and you must not pour out a drink offering on it.
EXO 30:10 Aaron is to make atonement on its horns once in the year with some of the blood of the sin offering for atonement; once in the year he is to make atonement on it throughout your generations. It is most holy to the Lord.”
EXO 30:11 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 30:12 “When you take a census of the Israelites according to their number, then each man is to pay a ransom for his life to the Lord when you number them, so that there will be no plague among them when you number them.
EXO 30:13 Everyone who crosses over to those who are numbered is to pay this: a half shekel according to the shekel of the sanctuary (a shekel weighs twenty gerahs). The half shekel is to be an offering to the Lord.
EXO 30:14 Everyone who crosses over to those numbered, from twenty years old and up, is to pay an offering to the Lord.
EXO 30:15 The rich are not to increase it, and the poor are not to pay less than the half shekel when giving the offering of the Lord, to make atonement for your lives.
EXO 30:16 You are to receive the atonement money from the Israelites and give it for the service of the tent of meeting. It will be a memorial for the Israelites before the Lord, to make atonement for your lives.”
EXO 30:17 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 30:18 “You are also to make a large bronze basin with a bronze stand for washing. You are to put it between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it,
EXO 30:19 and Aaron and his sons must wash their hands and their feet from it.
EXO 30:20 When they enter the tent of meeting, they must wash with water so that they do not die. Also, when they approach the altar to minister by burning incense as an offering made by fire to the Lord,
EXO 30:21 they must wash their hands and their feet so that they do not die. And this will be a perpetual ordinance for them and for their descendants throughout their generations.”
EXO 30:22 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 30:23 “Take choice spices: twelve and a half pounds of free-flowing myrrh, half that – about six and a quarter pounds – of sweet-smelling cinnamon, six and a quarter pounds of sweet-smelling cane,
EXO 30:24 and twelve and a half pounds of cassia, all weighed according to the sanctuary shekel, and four quarts of olive oil.
EXO 30:25 You are to make this into a sacred anointing oil, a perfumed compound, the work of a perfumer. It will be sacred anointing oil.
EXO 30:26 “With it you are to anoint the tent of meeting, the ark of the testimony,
EXO 30:27 the table and all its utensils, the lampstand and its utensils, the altar of incense,
EXO 30:28 the altar for the burnt offering and all its utensils, and the laver and its base.
EXO 30:29 So you are to sanctify them, and they will be most holy; anything that touches them will be holy.
EXO 30:30 “You are to anoint Aaron and his sons and sanctify them, so that they may minister as my priests.
EXO 30:31 And you are to tell the Israelites: ‘This is to be my sacred anointing oil throughout your generations.
EXO 30:32 It must not be applied to people’s bodies, and you must not make any like it with the same recipe. It is holy, and it must be holy to you.
EXO 30:33 Whoever makes perfume like it and whoever puts any of it on someone not a priest will be cut off from his people.’”
EXO 30:34 The Lord said to Moses: “Take spices, gum resin, onycha, galbanum, and pure frankincense of equal amounts
EXO 30:35 and make it into an incense, a perfume, the work of a perfumer. It is to be finely ground, and pure and sacred.
EXO 30:36 You are to beat some of it very fine and put some of it before the ark of the testimony in the tent of meeting where I will meet with you; it is to be most holy to you.
EXO 30:37 And the incense that you are to make, you must not make for yourselves using the same recipe; it is to be most holy to you, belonging to the Lord.
EXO 30:38 Whoever makes anything like it, to use as perfume, will be cut off from his people.”
EXO 31:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 31:2 “See, I have chosen Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
EXO 31:3 and I have filled him with the Spirit of God in skill, in understanding, in knowledge, and in all kinds of craftsmanship,
EXO 31:4 to make artistic designs for work with gold, with silver, and with bronze,
EXO 31:5 and with cutting and setting stone, and with cutting wood, to work in all kinds of craftsmanship.
EXO 31:6 Moreover, I have also given him Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, and I have given ability to all the specially skilled, that they may make everything I have commanded you:
EXO 31:7 the tent of meeting, the ark of the testimony, the atonement lid that is on it, all the furnishings of the tent,
EXO 31:8 the table with its utensils, the pure lampstand with all its utensils, the altar of incense,
EXO 31:9 the altar for the burnt offering with all its utensils, the large basin with its base,
EXO 31:10 the woven garments, the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons, to minister as priests,
EXO 31:11 the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the Holy Place. They will make all these things just as I have commanded you.”
EXO 31:12 The Lord said to Moses,
EXO 31:13 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Surely you must keep my Sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I am the Lord who sanctifies you.
EXO 31:14 So you must keep the Sabbath, for it is holy for you. Everyone who defiles it must surely be put to death; indeed, if anyone does any work on it, then that person will be cut off from among his people.
EXO 31:15 Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a Sabbath of complete rest, holy to the Lord; anyone who does work on the Sabbath day must surely be put to death.
EXO 31:16 The Israelites must keep the Sabbath by observing the Sabbath throughout their generations as a perpetual covenant.
EXO 31:17 It is a sign between me and the Israelites forever; for in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed.’”
EXO 31:18 He gave Moses two tablets of testimony when he had finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, tablets of stone written by the finger of God.
EXO 32:1 When the people saw that Moses delayed in coming down from the mountain, they gathered around Aaron and said to him, “Get up, make us gods that will go before us. As for this fellow Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him!”
EXO 32:2 So Aaron said to them, “Break off the gold earrings that are on the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.”
EXO 32:3 So all the people broke off the gold earrings that were on their ears and brought them to Aaron.
EXO 32:4 He accepted the gold from them, fashioned it with an engraving tool, and made a molten calf. Then they said, “These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of Egypt.”
EXO 32:5 When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it, and Aaron made a proclamation and said, “Tomorrow will be a feast to the Lord.”
EXO 32:6 So they got up early on the next day and offered up burnt offerings and brought peace offerings, and the people sat down to eat and drink, and they rose up to play.
EXO 32:7 The Lord spoke to Moses: “Go quickly, descend, because your people, whom you brought up from the land of Egypt, have acted corruptly.
EXO 32:8 They have quickly turned aside from the way that I commanded them – they have made for themselves a molten calf and have bowed down to it and sacrificed to it and said, ‘These are your gods, O Israel, which brought you up from the land of Egypt.’”
EXO 32:9 Then the Lord said to Moses: “I have seen this people. Look what a stiff-necked people they are!
EXO 32:10 So now, leave me alone so that my anger can burn against them and I can destroy them, and I will make from you a great nation.”
EXO 32:11 But Moses sought the favor of the Lord his God and said, “O Lord, why does your anger burn against your people, whom you have brought out from the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand?
EXO 32:12 Why should the Egyptians say, ‘For evil he led them out to kill them in the mountains and to destroy them from the face of the earth’? Turn from your burning anger, and relent of this evil against your people.
EXO 32:13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel your servants, to whom you swore by yourself and told them, ‘I will multiply your descendants like the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken about I will give to your descendants, and they will inherit it forever.’”
EXO 32:14 Then the Lord relented over the evil that he had said he would do to his people.
EXO 32:15 Moses turned and went down from the mountain with the two tablets of the testimony in his hands. The tablets were written on both sides – they were written on the front and on the back.
EXO 32:16 Now the tablets were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved on the tablets.
EXO 32:17 When Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, “It is the sound of war in the camp!”
EXO 32:18 Moses said, “It is not the sound of those who shout for victory, nor is it the sound of those who cry because they are overcome, but the sound of singing I hear.”
EXO 32:19 When he approached the camp and saw the calf and the dancing, Moses became extremely angry. He threw the tablets from his hands and broke them to pieces at the bottom of the mountain.
EXO 32:20 He took the calf they had made and burned it in the fire, ground it to powder, poured it out on the water, and made the Israelites drink it.
EXO 32:21 Moses said to Aaron, “What did this people do to you, that you have brought on them so great a sin?”
EXO 32:22 Aaron said, “Do not let your anger burn hot, my lord; you know these people, that they tend to evil.
EXO 32:23 They said to me, ‘Make us gods that will go before us, for as for this fellow Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has happened to him.’
EXO 32:24 So I said to them, ‘Whoever has gold, break it off.’ So they gave it to me, and I threw it into the fire, and this calf came out.”
EXO 32:25 Moses saw that the people were running wild, for Aaron had let them get completely out of control, causing derision from their enemies.
EXO 32:26 So Moses stood at the entrance of the camp and said, “Whoever is for the Lord, come to me.” All the Levites gathered around him,
EXO 32:27 and he said to them, “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, ‘Each man fasten his sword on his side, and go back and forth from entrance to entrance throughout the camp, and each one kill his brother, his friend, and his neighbor.’”
EXO 32:28 The Levites did what Moses ordered, and that day about three thousand men of the people died.
EXO 32:29 Moses said, “You have been consecrated today for the Lord, for each of you was against his son or against his brother, so he has given a blessing to you today.”
EXO 32:30 The next day Moses said to the people, “You have committed a very serious sin, but now I will go up to the Lord – perhaps I can make atonement on behalf of your sin.”
EXO 32:31 So Moses returned to the Lord and said, “Alas, this people has committed a very serious sin, and they have made for themselves gods of gold.
EXO 32:32 But now, if you will forgive their sin…, but if not, wipe me out from your book that you have written.”
EXO 32:33 The Lord said to Moses, “Whoever has sinned against me – that person I will wipe out of my book.
EXO 32:34 So now go, lead the people to the place I have spoken to you about. See, my angel will go before you. But on the day that I punish, I will indeed punish them for their sin.”
EXO 32:35 And the Lord sent a plague on the people because they had made the calf – the one Aaron made.
EXO 33:1 The Lord said to Moses, “Go up from here, you and the people whom you brought up out of the land of Egypt, to the land I promised on oath to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’
EXO 33:2 I will send an angel before you, and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
EXO 33:3 Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey. But I will not go up among you, for you are a stiff-necked people, and I might destroy you on the way.”
EXO 33:4 When the people heard this troubling word they mourned; no one put on his ornaments.
EXO 33:5 For the Lord had said to Moses, “Tell the Israelites, ‘You are a stiff-necked people. If I went up among you for a moment, I might destroy you. Now take off your ornaments, that I may know what I should do to you.’”
EXO 33:6 So the Israelites stripped off their ornaments by Mount Horeb.
EXO 33:7 Moses took the tent and pitched it outside the camp, at a good distance from the camp, and he called it the tent of meeting. Anyone seeking the Lord would go out to the tent of meeting that was outside the camp.
EXO 33:8 And when Moses went out to the tent, all the people would get up and stand at the entrance to their tents and watch Moses until he entered the tent.
EXO 33:9 And whenever Moses entered the tent, the pillar of cloud would descend and stand at the entrance of the tent, and the Lord would speak with Moses.
EXO 33:10 When all the people would see the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent, all the people, each one at the entrance of his own tent, would rise and worship.
EXO 33:11 The Lord would speak to Moses face to face, the way a person speaks to a friend. Then Moses would return to the camp, but his servant, Joshua son of Nun, a young man, did not leave the tent.
EXO 33:12 Moses said to the Lord, “See, you have been saying to me, ‘Bring this people up,’ but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. But you said, ‘I know you by name, and also you have found favor in my sight.’
EXO 33:13 Now if I have found favor in your sight, show me your way, that I may know you, that I may continue to find favor in your sight. And see that this nation is your people.”
EXO 33:14 And the Lord said, “My presence will go with you, and I will give you rest.”
EXO 33:15 And Moses said to him, “If your presence does not go with us, do not take us up from here.
EXO 33:16 For how will it be known then that I have found favor in your sight, I and your people? Is it not by your going with us, so that we will be distinguished, I and your people, from all the people who are on the face of the earth?”
EXO 33:17 The Lord said to Moses, “I will do this thing also that you have requested, for you have found favor in my sight, and I know you by name.”
EXO 33:18 And Moses said, “Show me your glory.”
EXO 33:19 And the Lord said, “I will make all my goodness pass before your face, and I will proclaim the Lord by name before you; I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy.”
EXO 33:20 But he added, “You cannot see my face, for no one can see me and live.”
EXO 33:21 The Lord said, “Here is a place by me; you will station yourself on a rock.
EXO 33:22 When my glory passes by, I will put you in a cleft in the rock and will cover you with my hand while I pass by.
EXO 33:23 Then I will take away my hand, and you will see my back, but my face must not be seen.”
EXO 34:1 The Lord said to Moses, “Cut out two tablets of stone like the first, and I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you smashed.
EXO 34:2 Be prepared in the morning, and go up in the morning to Mount Sinai, and station yourself for me there on the top of the mountain.
EXO 34:3 No one is to come up with you; do not let anyone be seen anywhere on the mountain; not even the flocks or the herds may graze in front of that mountain.”
EXO 34:4 So Moses cut out two tablets of stone like the first; early in the morning he went up to Mount Sinai, just as the Lord had commanded him, and he took in his hand the two tablets of stone.
EXO 34:5 The Lord descended in the cloud and stood with him there and proclaimed the Lord by name.
EXO 34:6 The Lord passed by before him and proclaimed: “The Lord, the Lord, the compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, and abounding in loyal love and faithfulness,
EXO 34:7 keeping loyal love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin. But he by no means leaves the guilty unpunished, responding to the transgression of fathers by dealing with children and children’s children, to the third and fourth generation.”
EXO 34:8 Moses quickly bowed to the ground and worshiped
EXO 34:9 and said, “If now I have found favor in your sight, O Lord, let my Lord go among us, for we are a stiff-necked people; pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for your inheritance.”
EXO 34:10 He said, “See, I am going to make a covenant before all your people. I will do wonders such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation. All the people among whom you live will see the work of the Lord, for it is a fearful thing that I am doing with you.
EXO 34:11 “Obey what I am commanding you this day. I am going to drive out before you the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
EXO 34:12 Be careful not to make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land where you are going, lest it become a snare among you.
EXO 34:13 Rather you must destroy their altars, smash their images, and cut down their Asherah poles.
EXO 34:14 For you must not worship any other god, for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God.
EXO 34:15 Be careful not to make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, for when they prostitute themselves to their gods and sacrifice to their gods, and someone invites you, you will eat from his sacrifice;
EXO 34:16 and you then take his daughters for your sons, and when his daughters prostitute themselves to their gods, they will make your sons prostitute themselves to their gods as well.
EXO 34:17 You must not make yourselves molten gods.
EXO 34:18 “You must keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. For seven days you must eat bread made without yeast, as I commanded you; do this at the appointed time of the month Abib, for in the month Abib you came out of Egypt.
EXO 34:19 “Every firstborn of the womb belongs to me, even every firstborn of your cattle that is a male, whether ox or sheep.
EXO 34:20 Now the firstling of a donkey you may redeem with a lamb, but if you do not redeem it, then break its neck. You must redeem all the firstborn of your sons. “No one will appear before me empty-handed.
EXO 34:21 “On six days you may labor, but on the seventh day you must rest; even at the time of plowing and of harvest you are to rest.
EXO 34:22 “You must observe the Feast of Weeks – the firstfruits of the harvest of wheat – and the Feast of Ingathering at the end of the year.
EXO 34:23 At three times in the year all your men must appear before the Lord God, the God of Israel.
EXO 34:24 For I will drive out the nations before you and enlarge your borders; no one will covet your land when you go up to appear before the Lord your God three times in the year.
EXO 34:25 “You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice with yeast; the sacrifice from the feast of Passover must not remain until the following morning.
EXO 34:26 “The first of the firstfruits of your soil you must bring to the house of the Lord your God. You must not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.”
EXO 34:27 The Lord said to Moses, “Write down these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.”
EXO 34:28 So he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did not eat bread, and he did not drink water. He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.
EXO 34:29 Now when Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the testimony in his hand – when he came down from the mountain, Moses did not know that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.
EXO 34:30 When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to approach him.
EXO 34:31 But Moses called to them, so Aaron and all the leaders of the community came back to him, and Moses spoke to them.
EXO 34:32 After this all the Israelites approached, and he commanded them all that the Lord had spoken to him on Mount Sinai.
EXO 34:33 When Moses finished speaking with them, he would put a veil on his face.
EXO 34:34 But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he would remove the veil until he came out. Then he would come out and tell the Israelites what he had been commanded.
EXO 34:35 When the Israelites would see the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone, Moses would put the veil on his face again, until he went in to speak with the Lord.
EXO 35:1 Moses assembled the whole community of the Israelites and said to them, “These are the things that the Lord has commanded you to do.
EXO 35:2 In six days work may be done, but on the seventh day there must be a holy day for you, a Sabbath of complete rest to the Lord. Anyone who does work on it will be put to death.
EXO 35:3 You must not kindle a fire in any of your homes on the Sabbath day.”
EXO 35:4 Moses spoke to the whole community of the Israelites, “This is the word that the Lord has commanded:
EXO 35:5 ‘Take an offering for the Lord. Let everyone who has a willing heart bring an offering to the Lord: gold, silver, bronze,
EXO 35:6 blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, fine linen, goat’s hair,
EXO 35:7 ram skins dyed red, fine leather, acacia wood,
EXO 35:8 olive oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense,
EXO 35:9 onyx stones, and other gems for mounting on the ephod and the breastpiece.
EXO 35:10 Every skilled person among you is to come and make all that the Lord has commanded:
EXO 35:11 the tabernacle with its tent, its covering, its clasps, its frames, its crossbars, its posts, and its bases;
EXO 35:12 the ark, with its poles, the atonement lid, and the special curtain that conceals it;
EXO 35:13 the table with its poles and all its vessels, and the Bread of the Presence;
EXO 35:14 the lampstand for the light and its accessories, its lamps, and oil for the light;
EXO 35:15 and the altar of incense with its poles, the anointing oil, and the fragrant incense; the hanging for the door at the entrance of the tabernacle;
EXO 35:16 the altar for the burnt offering with its bronze grating that is on it, its poles, and all its utensils; the large basin and its pedestal;
EXO 35:17 the hangings of the courtyard, its posts and its bases, and the curtain for the gateway to the courtyard;
EXO 35:18 tent pegs for the tabernacle and tent pegs for the courtyard and their ropes;
EXO 35:19 the woven garments for serving in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments for his sons to minister as priests.”
EXO 35:20 So the whole community of the Israelites went out from the presence of Moses.
EXO 35:21 Everyone whose heart stirred him to action and everyone whose spirit was willing came and brought the offering for the Lord for the work of the tent of meeting, for all its service, and for the holy garments.
EXO 35:22 They came, men and women alike, all who had willing hearts. They brought brooches, earrings, rings and ornaments, all kinds of gold jewelry, and everyone came who waved a wave offering of gold to the Lord.
EXO 35:23 Everyone who had blue, purple, or scarlet yarn, fine linen, goats’ hair, ram skins dyed red, or fine leather brought them.
EXO 35:24 Everyone making an offering of silver or bronze brought it as an offering to the Lord, and everyone who had acacia wood for any work of the service brought it.
EXO 35:25 Every woman who was skilled spun with her hands and brought what she had spun, blue, purple, or scarlet yarn, or fine linen,
EXO 35:26 and all the women whose heart stirred them to action and who were skilled spun goats’ hair.
EXO 35:27 The leaders brought onyx stones and other gems to be mounted for the ephod and the breastpiece,
EXO 35:28 and spices and olive oil for the light, for the anointing oil, and for the fragrant incense.
EXO 35:29 The Israelites brought a freewill offering to the Lord, every man and woman whose heart was willing to bring materials for all the work that the Lord through Moses had commanded them to do.
EXO 35:30 Moses said to the Israelites, “See, the Lord has chosen Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.
EXO 35:31 He has filled him with the Spirit of God – with skill, with understanding, with knowledge, and in all kinds of work,
EXO 35:32 to design artistic designs, to work in gold, in silver, and in bronze,
EXO 35:33 and in cutting stones for their setting, and in cutting wood, to do work in every artistic craft.
EXO 35:34 And he has put it in his heart to teach, he and Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.
EXO 35:35 He has filled them with skill to do all kinds of work as craftsmen, as designers, as embroiderers in blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and in fine linen, and as weavers. They are craftsmen in all the work and artistic designers.
EXO 36:1 So Bezalel and Oholiab and every skilled person in whom the Lord has put skill and ability to know how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary are to do the work according to all that the Lord has commanded.”
EXO 36:2 Moses summoned Bezalel and Oholiab and every skilled person in whom the Lord had put skill – everyone whose heart stirred him to volunteer to do the work,
EXO 36:3 and they received from Moses all the offerings the Israelites had brought to do the work for the service of the sanctuary, and they still continued to bring him a freewill offering each morning.
EXO 36:4 So all the skilled people who were doing all the work on the sanctuary came from the work they were doing
EXO 36:5 and told Moses, “The people are bringing much more than is needed for the completion of the work which the Lord commanded us to do!”
EXO 36:6 Moses instructed them to take his message throughout the camp, saying, “Let no man or woman do any more work for the offering for the sanctuary.” So the people were restrained from bringing any more.
EXO 36:7 Now the materials were more than enough for them to do all the work.
EXO 36:8 All the skilled among those who were doing the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twisted linen and blue and purple and scarlet; they were made with cherubim that were the work of an artistic designer.
EXO 36:9 The length of one curtain was forty-two feet, and the width of one curtain was six feet – the same size for each of the curtains.
EXO 36:10 He joined five of the curtains to one another, and the other five curtains he joined to one another.
EXO 36:11 He made loops of blue material along the edge of the end curtain in the first set; he did the same along the edge of the end curtain in the second set.
EXO 36:12 He made fifty loops on the first curtain, and he made fifty loops on the end curtain that was in the second set, with the loops opposite one another.
EXO 36:13 He made fifty gold clasps and joined the curtains together to one another with the clasps, so that the tabernacle was a unit.
EXO 36:14 He made curtains of goats’ hair for a tent over the tabernacle; he made eleven curtains.
EXO 36:15 The length of one curtain was forty-five feet, and the width of one curtain was six feet – one size for all eleven curtains.
EXO 36:16 He joined five curtains by themselves and six curtains by themselves.
EXO 36:17 He made fifty loops along the edge of the end curtain in the first set and fifty loops along the edge of the curtain that joined the second set.
EXO 36:18 He made fifty bronze clasps to join the tent together so that it might be a unit.
EXO 36:19 He made a covering for the tent out of ram skins dyed red and over that a covering of fine leather.
EXO 36:20 He made the frames for the tabernacle of acacia wood as uprights.
EXO 36:21 The length of each frame was fifteen feet, the width of each frame was two and a quarter feet,
EXO 36:22 with two projections per frame parallel one to another. He made all the frames of the tabernacle in this way.
EXO 36:23 So he made frames for the tabernacle: twenty frames for the south side.
EXO 36:24 He made forty silver bases under the twenty frames – two bases under the first frame for its two projections, and likewise two bases under the next frame for its two projections,
EXO 36:25 and for the second side of the tabernacle, the north side, he made twenty frames
EXO 36:26 and their forty silver bases, two bases under the first frame and two bases under the next frame.
EXO 36:27 And for the back of the tabernacle on the west he made six frames.
EXO 36:28 He made two frames for the corners of the tabernacle on the back.
EXO 36:29 At the two corners they were doubled at the lower end and finished together at the top in one ring. So he did for both.
EXO 36:30 So there were eight frames and their silver bases, sixteen bases, two bases under each frame.
EXO 36:31 He made bars of acacia wood, five for the frames on one side of the tabernacle
EXO 36:32 and five bars for the frames on the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the frames of the tabernacle for the back side on the west.
EXO 36:33 He made the middle bar to reach from end to end in the center of the frames.
EXO 36:34 He overlaid the frames with gold and made their rings of gold to provide places for the bars, and he overlaid the bars with gold.
EXO 36:35 He made the special curtain of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twisted linen; he made it with cherubim, the work of an artistic designer.
EXO 36:36 He made for it four posts of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold, with gold hooks, and he cast for them four silver bases.
EXO 36:37 He made a hanging for the entrance of the tent of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twisted linen, the work of an embroiderer,
EXO 36:38 and its five posts and their hooks. He overlaid their tops and their bands with gold, but their five bases were bronze.
EXO 37:1 Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood; its length was three feet nine inches, its width two feet three inches, and its height two feet three inches.
EXO 37:2 He overlaid it with pure gold, inside and out, and he made a surrounding border of gold for it.
EXO 37:3 He cast four gold rings for it that he put on its four feet, with two rings on one side and two rings on the other side.
EXO 37:4 He made poles of acacia wood, overlaid them with gold,
EXO 37:5 and put the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark in order to carry the ark.
EXO 37:6 He made an atonement lid of pure gold; its length was three feet nine inches, and its width was two feet three inches.
EXO 37:7 He made two cherubim of gold; he made them of hammered metal on the two ends of the atonement lid,
EXO 37:8 one cherub on one end and one cherub on the other end. He made the cherubim from the atonement lid on its two ends.
EXO 37:9 The cherubim were spreading their wings upward, overshadowing the atonement lid with their wings. The cherubim faced each other, looking toward the atonement lid.
EXO 37:10 He made the table of acacia wood; its length was three feet, its width one foot six inches, and its height two feet three inches.
EXO 37:11 He overlaid it with pure gold, and he made a surrounding border of gold for it.
EXO 37:12 He made a surrounding frame for it about three inches wide, and he made a surrounding border of gold for its frame.
EXO 37:13 He cast four gold rings for it and attached the rings at the four corners where its four legs were.
EXO 37:14 The rings were close to the frame to provide places for the poles to carry the table.
EXO 37:15 He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold, to carry the table.
EXO 37:16 He made the vessels which were on the table out of pure gold, its plates, its ladles, its pitchers, and its bowls, to be used in pouring out offerings.
EXO 37:17 He made the lampstand of pure gold. He made the lampstand of hammered metal; its base and its shaft, its cups, its buds, and its blossoms were from the same piece.
EXO 37:18 Six branches were extending from its sides, three branches of the lampstand from one side of it, and three branches of the lampstand from the other side of it.
EXO 37:19 Three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms were on the first branch, and three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms were on the next branch, and the same for the six branches that were extending from the lampstand.
EXO 37:20 On the lampstand there were four cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms,
EXO 37:21 with a bud under the first two branches from it, and a bud under the next two branches from it, and a bud under the third two branches from it; according to the six branches that extended from it.
EXO 37:22 Their buds and their branches were of one piece; all of it was one hammered piece of pure gold.
EXO 37:23 He made its seven lamps, its trimmers, and its trays of pure gold.
EXO 37:24 He made the lampstand and all its accessories with seventy-five pounds of pure gold.
EXO 37:25 He made the incense altar of acacia wood. Its length was a foot and a half and its width a foot and a half – a square – and its height was three feet. Its horns were of one piece with it.
EXO 37:26 He overlaid it with pure gold – its top, its four walls, and its horns – and he made a surrounding border of gold for it.
EXO 37:27 He also made two gold rings for it under its border, on its two sides, on opposite sides, as places for poles to carry it with.
EXO 37:28 He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
EXO 37:29 He made the sacred anointing oil and the pure fragrant incense, the work of a perfumer.
EXO 38:1 He made the altar for the burnt offering of acacia wood seven feet six inches long and seven feet six inches wide – it was square – and its height was four feet six inches.
EXO 38:2 He made its horns on its four corners; its horns were part of it, and he overlaid it with bronze.
EXO 38:3 He made all the utensils of the altar – the pots, the shovels, the tossing bowls, the meat hooks, and the fire pans – he made all its utensils of bronze.
EXO 38:4 He made a grating for the altar, a network of bronze under its ledge, halfway up from the bottom.
EXO 38:5 He cast four rings for the four corners of the bronze grating, to provide places for the poles.
EXO 38:6 He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with bronze.
EXO 38:7 He put the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar, with which to carry it. He made the altar hollow, out of boards.
EXO 38:8 He made the large basin of bronze and its pedestal of bronze from the mirrors of the women who served at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
EXO 38:9 He made the courtyard. For the south side the hangings of the courtyard were of fine twisted linen, one hundred fifty feet long,
EXO 38:10 with their twenty posts and their twenty bronze bases, with the hooks of the posts and their bands of silver.
EXO 38:11 For the north side the hangings were one hundred fifty feet, with their twenty posts and their twenty bronze bases, with the hooks of the posts and their bands of silver.
EXO 38:12 For the west side there were hangings seventy-five feet long, with their ten posts and their ten bases, with the hooks of the posts and their bands of silver.
EXO 38:13 For the east side, toward the sunrise, it was seventy-five feet wide,
EXO 38:14 with hangings on one side of the gate that were twenty-two and a half feet long, with their three posts and their three bases,
EXO 38:15 and for the second side of the gate of the courtyard, just like the other, the hangings were twenty-two and a half feet long, with their three posts and their three bases.
EXO 38:16 All the hangings around the courtyard were of fine twisted linen.
EXO 38:17 The bases for the posts were bronze. The hooks of the posts and their bands were silver, their tops were overlaid with silver, and all the posts of the courtyard had silver bands.
EXO 38:18 The curtain for the gate of the courtyard was of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twisted linen, the work of an embroiderer. It was thirty feet long, and like the hangings in the courtyard, it was seven and a half feet high,
EXO 38:19 with four posts and their four bronze bases. Their hooks and their bands were silver, and their tops were overlaid with silver.
EXO 38:20 All the tent pegs of the tabernacle and of the courtyard all around were bronze.
EXO 38:21 This is the inventory of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the testimony, which was counted by the order of Moses, being the work of the Levites under the direction of Ithamar, son of Aaron the priest.
EXO 38:22 Now Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made everything that the Lord had commanded Moses;
EXO 38:23 and with him was Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an artisan, a designer, and an embroiderer in blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen.
EXO 38:24 All the gold that was used for the work, in all the work of the sanctuary (namely, the gold of the wave offering) was twenty-nine talents and 730 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel.
EXO 38:25 The silver of those who were numbered of the community was one hundred talents and 1,775 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel,
EXO 38:26 one beka per person, that is, a half shekel, according to the sanctuary shekel, for everyone who crossed over to those numbered, from twenty years old or older, 603,550 in all.
EXO 38:27 The one hundred talents of silver were used for casting the bases of the sanctuary and the bases of the special curtain – one hundred bases for one hundred talents, one talent per base.
EXO 38:28 From the remaining 1,775 shekels he made hooks for the posts, overlaid their tops, and made bands for them.
EXO 38:29 The bronze of the wave offering was seventy talents and 2,400 shekels.
EXO 38:30 With it he made the bases for the door of the tent of meeting, the bronze altar, the bronze grating for it, and all the utensils of the altar,
EXO 38:31 the bases for the courtyard all around, the bases for the gate of the courtyard, all the tent pegs of the tabernacle, and all the tent pegs of the courtyard all around.
EXO 39:1 From the blue, purple, and scarlet yarn they made woven garments for serving in the sanctuary; they made holy garments that were for Aaron, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:2 He made the ephod of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen.
EXO 39:3 They hammered the gold into thin sheets and cut it into narrow strips to weave them into the blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and into the fine linen, the work of an artistic designer.
EXO 39:4 They made shoulder pieces for it, attached to two of its corners, so it could be joined together.
EXO 39:5 The artistically woven waistband of the ephod that was on it was like it, of one piece with it, of gold, blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twisted linen, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:6 They set the onyx stones in gold filigree settings, engraved as with the engravings of a seal with the names of the sons of Israel.
EXO 39:7 He put them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod as stones of memorial for the Israelites, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:8 He made the breastpiece, the work of an artistic designer, in the same fashion as the ephod, of gold, blue, purple, and scarlet, and fine twisted linen.
EXO 39:9 It was square – they made the breastpiece doubled, nine inches long and nine inches wide when doubled.
EXO 39:10 They set on it four rows of stones: a row with a ruby, a topaz, and a beryl – the first row;
EXO 39:11 and the second row, a turquoise, a sapphire, and an emerald;
EXO 39:12 and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;
EXO 39:13 and the fourth row, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper. They were enclosed in gold filigree settings.
EXO 39:14 The stones were for the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, corresponding to the number of their names. Each name corresponding to one of the twelve tribes was like the engravings of a seal.
EXO 39:15 They made for the breastpiece braided chains like cords of pure gold,
EXO 39:16 and they made two gold filigree settings and two gold rings, and they attached the two rings to the upper two ends of the breastpiece.
EXO 39:17 They attached the two gold chains to the two rings at the ends of the breastpiece;
EXO 39:18 the other two ends of the two chains they attached to the two settings, and they attached them to the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front of it.
EXO 39:19 They made two rings of gold and put them on the other two ends of the breastpiece on its edge, which is on the inner side of the ephod.
EXO 39:20 They made two more gold rings and attached them to the bottom of the two shoulder pieces on the front of the ephod, close to the juncture above the waistband of the ephod.
EXO 39:21 They tied the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod by blue cord, so that it was above the waistband of the ephod, so that the breastpiece would not be loose from the ephod, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:22 He made the robe of the ephod completely blue, the work of a weaver.
EXO 39:23 There was an opening in the center of the robe, like the opening of a collar, with an edge all around the opening so that it could not be torn.
EXO 39:24 They made pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and twisted linen around the hem of the robe.
EXO 39:25 They made bells of pure gold and attached the bells between the pomegranates around the hem of the robe between the pomegranates.
EXO 39:26 There was a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, all around the hem of the robe, to be used in ministering, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:27 They made tunics of fine linen – the work of a weaver, for Aaron and for his sons –
EXO 39:28 and the turban of fine linen, the headbands of fine linen, and the undergarments of fine twisted linen.
EXO 39:29 The sash was of fine twisted linen and blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, the work of an embroiderer, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:30 They made a plate, the holy diadem, of pure gold and wrote on it an inscription, as on the engravings of a seal, “Holiness to the Lord.”
EXO 39:31 They attached to it a blue cord, to attach it to the turban above, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:32 So all the work of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, was completed, and the Israelites did according to all that the Lord had commanded Moses – they did it exactly so.
EXO 39:33 They brought the tabernacle to Moses, the tent and all its furnishings, clasps, frames, bars, posts, and bases;
EXO 39:34 and the coverings of ram skins dyed red, the covering of fine leather, and the protecting curtain;
EXO 39:35 the ark of the testimony and its poles, and the atonement lid;
EXO 39:36 the table, all its utensils, and the Bread of the Presence;
EXO 39:37 the pure lampstand, its lamps, with the lamps set in order, and all its accessories, and oil for the light;
EXO 39:38 and the gold altar, and the anointing oil, and the fragrant incense; and the curtain for the entrance to the tent;
EXO 39:39 the bronze altar and its bronze grating, its poles, and all its utensils; the large basin with its pedestal;
EXO 39:40 the hangings of the courtyard, its posts and its bases, and the curtain for the gateway of the courtyard, its ropes and its tent pegs, and all the furnishings for the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting;
EXO 39:41 the woven garments for serving in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments for his sons to minister as priests.
EXO 39:42 The Israelites did all the work according to all that the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 39:43 Moses inspected all the work – and they had done it just as the Lord had commanded – they had done it exactly – and Moses blessed them.
EXO 40:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
EXO 40:2 “On the first day of the first month you are to set up the tabernacle, the tent of meeting.
EXO 40:3 You are to place the ark of the testimony in it and shield the ark with the special curtain.
EXO 40:4 You are to bring in the table and set out the things that belong on it; then you are to bring in the lampstand and set up its lamps.
EXO 40:5 You are to put the gold altar for incense in front of the ark of the testimony and put the curtain at the entrance to the tabernacle.
EXO 40:6 You are to put the altar for the burnt offering in front of the entrance to the tabernacle, the tent of meeting.
EXO 40:7 You are to put the large basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it.
EXO 40:8 You are to set up the courtyard around it and put the curtain at the gate of the courtyard.
EXO 40:9 And take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and sanctify it and all its furnishings, and it will be holy.
EXO 40:10 Then you are to anoint the altar for the burnt offering with all its utensils; you are to sanctify the altar, and it will be the most holy altar.
EXO 40:11 You must also anoint the large basin and its pedestal, and you are to sanctify it.
EXO 40:12 “You are to bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting and wash them with water.
EXO 40:13 Then you are to clothe Aaron with the holy garments and anoint him and sanctify him so that he may minister as my priest.
EXO 40:14 You are to bring his sons and clothe them with tunics
EXO 40:15 and anoint them just as you anointed their father, so that they may minister as my priests; their anointing will make them a priesthood that will continue throughout their generations.”
EXO 40:16 This is what Moses did, according to all the Lord had commanded him – so he did.
EXO 40:17 So the tabernacle was set up on the first day of the first month, in the second year.
EXO 40:18 When Moses set up the tabernacle and put its bases in place, he set up its frames, attached its bars, and set up its posts.
EXO 40:19 Then he spread the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering of the tent over it, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:20 He took the testimony and put it in the ark, attached the poles to the ark, and then put the atonement lid on the ark.
EXO 40:21 And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, hung the protecting curtain, and shielded the ark of the testimony from view, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:22 And he put the table in the tent of meeting, on the north side of the tabernacle, outside the curtain.
EXO 40:23 And he set the bread in order on it before the Lord, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:24 And he put the lampstand in the tent of meeting opposite the table, on the south side of the tabernacle.
EXO 40:25 Then he set up the lamps before the Lord, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:26 And he put the gold altar in the tent of meeting in front of the curtain,
EXO 40:27 and he burned fragrant incense on it, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:28 Then he put the curtain at the entrance to the tabernacle.
EXO 40:29 He also put the altar for the burnt offering by the entrance to the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, and offered on it the burnt offering and the meal offering, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:30 Then he put the large basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it for washing.
EXO 40:31 Moses and Aaron and his sons would wash their hands and their feet from it.
EXO 40:32 Whenever they entered the tent of meeting, and whenever they approached the altar, they would wash, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
EXO 40:33 And he set up the courtyard around the tabernacle and the altar, and put the curtain at the gate of the courtyard. So Moses finished the work.
EXO 40:34 Then the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.
EXO 40:35 Moses was not able to enter the tent of meeting because the cloud settled on it and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.
EXO 40:36 But when the cloud was lifted up from the tabernacle, the Israelites would set out on all their journeys;
EXO 40:37 but if the cloud was not lifted up, then they would not journey further until the day it was lifted up.
EXO 40:38 For the cloud of the Lord was on the tabernacle by day, but fire would be on it at night, in plain view of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.
LEV 1:1 Then the Lord called to Moses and spoke to him from the Meeting Tent:
LEV 1:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When someone among you presents an offering to the Lord, you must present your offering from the domesticated animals, either from the herd or from the flock.
LEV 1:3 “‘If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd he must present it as a flawless male; he must present it at the entrance of the Meeting Tent for its acceptance before the Lord.
LEV 1:4 He must lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it will be accepted for him to make atonement on his behalf.
LEV 1:5 Then the one presenting the offering must slaughter the bull before the Lord, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, must present the blood and splash the blood against the sides of the altar which is at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 1:6 Next, the one presenting the offering must skin the burnt offering and cut it into parts,
LEV 1:7 and the sons of Aaron, the priest, must put fire on the altar and arrange wood on the fire.
LEV 1:8 Then the sons of Aaron, the priests, must arrange the parts with the head and the suet on the wood that is in the fire on the altar.
LEV 1:9 Finally, the one presenting the offering must wash its entrails and its legs in water and the priest must offer all of it up in smoke on the altar – it is a burnt offering, a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 1:10 “‘If his offering is from the flock for a burnt offering – from the sheep or the goats – he must present a flawless male,
LEV 1:11 and must slaughter it on the north side of the altar before the Lord, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will splash its blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 1:12 Next, the one presenting the offering must cut it into parts, with its head and its suet, and the priest must arrange them on the wood which is in the fire, on the altar.
LEV 1:13 Then the one presenting the offering must wash the entrails and the legs in water, and the priest must present all of it and offer it up in smoke on the altar – it is a burnt offering, a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 1:14 “‘If his offering to the Lord is a burnt offering from the birds, he must present his offering from the turtledoves or from the young pigeons.
LEV 1:15 The priest must present it at the altar, pinch off its head and offer the head up in smoke on the altar, and its blood must be drained out against the side of the altar.
LEV 1:16 Then the priest must remove its entrails by cutting off its tail feathers, and throw them to the east side of the altar into the place of fatty ashes,
LEV 1:17 and tear it open by its wings without dividing it into two parts. Finally, the priest must offer it up in smoke on the altar on the wood which is in the fire – it is a burnt offering, a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 2:1 “‘When a person presents a grain offering to the Lord, his offering must consist of choice wheat flour, and he must pour olive oil on it and put frankincense on it.
LEV 2:2 Then he must bring it to the sons of Aaron, the priests, and the priest must scoop out from there a handful of its choice wheat flour and some of its olive oil in addition to all of its frankincense, and the priest must offer its memorial portion up in smoke on the altar – it is a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 2:3 The remainder of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and to his sons – it is most holy from the gifts of the Lord.
LEV 2:4 “‘When you present an offering of grain baked in an oven, it must be made of choice wheat flour baked into unleavened loaves mixed with olive oil or unleavened wafers smeared with olive oil.
LEV 2:5 If your offering is a grain offering made on the griddle, it must be choice wheat flour mixed with olive oil, unleavened.
LEV 2:6 Crumble it in pieces and pour olive oil on it – it is a grain offering.
LEV 2:7 If your offering is a grain offering made in a pan, it must be made of choice wheat flour deep fried in olive oil.
LEV 2:8 “‘You must bring the grain offering that must be made from these to the Lord. Present it to the priest, and he will bring it to the altar.
LEV 2:9 Then the priest must take up from the grain offering its memorial portion and offer it up in smoke on the altar – it is a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 2:10 The remainder of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and to his sons – it is most holy from the gifts of the Lord.
LEV 2:11 “‘No grain offering which you present to the Lord can be made with yeast, for you must not offer up in smoke any yeast or honey as a gift to the Lord.
LEV 2:12 You can present them to the Lord as an offering of first fruit, but they must not go up to the altar for a soothing aroma.
LEV 2:13 Moreover, you must season every one of your grain offerings with salt; you must not allow the salt of the covenant of your God to be missing from your grain offering – on every one of your grain offerings you must present salt.
LEV 2:14 “‘If you present a grain offering of first ripe grain to the Lord, you must present your grain offering of first ripe grain as soft kernels roasted in fire – crushed bits of fresh grain.
LEV 2:15 And you must put olive oil on it and set frankincense on it – it is a grain offering.
LEV 2:16 Then the priest must offer its memorial portion up in smoke – some of its crushed bits, some of its olive oil, in addition to all of its frankincense – it is a gift to the Lord.
LEV 3:1 “‘Now if his offering is a peace offering sacrifice, if he presents an offering from the herd, he must present before the Lord a flawless male or a female.
LEV 3:2 He must lay his hand on the head of his offering and slaughter it at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, must splash the blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 3:3 Then the one presenting the offering must present a gift to the Lord from the peace offering sacrifice: He must remove the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that surrounds the entrails,
LEV 3:4 the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys).
LEV 3:5 Then the sons of Aaron must offer it up in smoke on the altar atop the burnt offering that is on the wood in the fire as a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 3:6 “‘If his offering for a peace offering sacrifice to the Lord is from the flock, he must present a flawless male or female.
LEV 3:7 If he presents a sheep as his offering, he must present it before the Lord.
LEV 3:8 He must lay his hand on the head of his offering and slaughter it before the Meeting Tent, and the sons of Aaron must splash its blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 3:9 Then he must present a gift to the Lord from the peace offering sacrifice: He must remove all the fatty tail up to the end of the spine, the fat covering the entrails, and all the fat on the entrails,
LEV 3:10 the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys).
LEV 3:11 Then the priest must offer it up in smoke on the altar as a food gift to the Lord.
LEV 3:12 “‘If his offering is a goat he must present it before the Lord,
LEV 3:13 lay his hand on its head, and slaughter it before the Meeting Tent, and the sons of Aaron must splash its blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 3:14 Then he must present from it his offering as a gift to the Lord: the fat which covers the entrails and all the fat on the entrails,
LEV 3:15 the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys).
LEV 3:16 Then the priest must offer them up in smoke on the altar as a food gift for a soothing aroma – all the fat belongs to the Lord.
LEV 3:17 This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all the places where you live: You must never eat any fat or any blood.’”
LEV 4:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 4:2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘When a person sins by straying unintentionally from any of the Lord’s commandments which must not be violated, and violates any one of them –
LEV 4:3 “‘If the high priest sins so that the people are guilty, on account of the sin he has committed he must present a flawless young bull to the Lord for a sin offering.
LEV 4:4 He must bring the bull to the entrance of the Meeting Tent before the Lord, lay his hand on the head of the bull, and slaughter the bull before the Lord.
LEV 4:5 Then that high priest must take some of the blood of the bull and bring it to the Meeting Tent.
LEV 4:6 The priest must dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle some of it seven times before the Lord toward the front of the veil-canopy of the sanctuary.
LEV 4:7 The priest must put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of fragrant incense that is before the Lord in the Meeting Tent, and all the rest of the bull’s blood he must pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering that is at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 4:8 “‘Then he must take up all the fat from the sin offering bull: the fat covering the entrails and all the fat surrounding the entrails,
LEV 4:9 the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys)
LEV 4:10 – just as it is taken from the ox of the peace offering sacrifice – and the priest must offer them up in smoke on the altar of burnt offering.
LEV 4:11 But the hide of the bull, all its flesh along with its head and its legs, its entrails, and its dung –
LEV 4:12 all the rest of the bull – he must bring outside the camp to a ceremonially clean place, to the fatty ash pile, and he must burn it on a wood fire; it must be burned on the fatty ash pile.
LEV 4:13 “‘If the whole congregation of Israel strays unintentionally and the matter is not noticed by the assembly, and they violate one of the Lord’s commandments, which must not be violated, so they become guilty,
LEV 4:14 the assembly must present a young bull for a sin offering when the sin they have committed becomes known. They must bring it before the Meeting Tent,
LEV 4:15 the elders of the congregation must lay their hands on the head of the bull before the Lord, and someone must slaughter the bull before the Lord.
LEV 4:16 Then the high priest must bring some of the blood of the bull to the Meeting Tent,
LEV 4:17 and that priest must dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle some of the blood seven times before the Lord toward the front of the veil-canopy.
LEV 4:18 He must put some of the blood on the horns of the altar which is before the Lord in the Meeting Tent, and all the rest of the blood he must pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering that is at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 4:19 “‘Then the priest must take all its fat and offer the fat up in smoke on the altar.
LEV 4:20 He must do with the rest of the bull just as he did with the bull of the sin offering; this is what he must do with it. So the priest will make atonement on their behalf and they will be forgiven.
LEV 4:21 He must bring the rest of the bull outside the camp and burn it just as he burned the first bull – it is the sin offering of the assembly.
LEV 4:22 “‘Whenever a leader, by straying unintentionally, sins and violates one of the commandments of the Lord his God which must not be violated, and he pleads guilty,
LEV 4:23 or his sin that he committed is made known to him, he must bring a flawless male goat as his offering.
LEV 4:24 He must lay his hand on the head of the male goat and slaughter it in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered before the Lord – it is a sin offering.
LEV 4:25 Then the priest must take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he must pour out the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering.
LEV 4:26 Then the priest must offer all of its fat up in smoke on the altar like the fat of the peace offering sacrifice. So the priest will make atonement on his behalf for his sin and he will be forgiven.
LEV 4:27 “‘If an ordinary individual sins by straying unintentionally when he violates one of the Lord’s commandments which must not be violated, and he pleads guilty
LEV 4:28 or his sin that he committed is made known to him, he must bring a flawless female goat as his offering for the sin that he committed.
LEV 4:29 He must lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter the sin offering in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered.
LEV 4:30 Then the priest must take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he must pour out all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
LEV 4:31 Then he must remove all of its fat (just as fat was removed from the peace offering sacrifice) and the priest must offer it up in smoke on the altar for a soothing aroma to the Lord. So the priest will make atonement on his behalf and he will be forgiven.
LEV 4:32 “‘But if he brings a sheep as his offering, for a sin offering, he must bring a flawless female.
LEV 4:33 He must lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it for a sin offering in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered.
LEV 4:34 Then the priest must take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he must pour out all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
LEV 4:35 Then the one who brought the offering must remove all its fat (just as the fat of the sheep is removed from the peace offering sacrifice) and the priest must offer them up in smoke on the altar on top of the other gifts of the Lord. So the priest will make atonement on his behalf for his sin which he has committed and he will be forgiven.
LEV 5:1 “‘When a person sins in that he hears a public curse against one who fails to testify and he is a witness (he either saw or knew what had happened ) and he does not make it known, then he will bear his punishment for iniquity.
LEV 5:2 Or when there is a person who touches anything ceremonially unclean, whether the carcass of an unclean wild animal, or the carcass of an unclean domesticated animal, or the carcass of an unclean creeping thing, even if he did not realize it, but he himself has become unclean and is guilty;
LEV 5:3 or when he touches human uncleanness with regard to anything by which he can become unclean, even if he did not realize it, but he himself has later come to know it and is guilty;
LEV 5:4 or when a person swears an oath, speaking thoughtlessly with his lips, whether to do evil or to do good, with regard to anything which the individual might speak thoughtlessly in an oath, even if he did not realize it, but he himself has later come to know it and is guilty with regard to one of these oaths –
LEV 5:5 when an individual becomes guilty with regard to one of these things he must confess how he has sinned,
LEV 5:6 and he must bring his penalty for guilt to the Lord for his sin that he has committed, a female from the flock, whether a female sheep or a female goat, for a sin offering. So the priest will make atonement on his behalf for his sin.
LEV 5:7 “‘If he cannot afford an animal from the flock, he must bring his penalty for guilt for his sin that he has committed, two turtledoves or two young pigeons, to the Lord, one for a sin offering and one for a burnt offering.
LEV 5:8 He must bring them to the priest and present first the one that is for a sin offering. The priest must pinch its head at the nape of its neck, but must not sever the head from the body.
LEV 5:9 Then he must sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on the wall of the altar, and the remainder of the blood must be squeezed out at the base of the altar – it is a sin offering.
LEV 5:10 The second bird he must make a burnt offering according to the standard regulation. So the priest will make atonement on behalf of this person for his sin which he has committed, and he will be forgiven.
LEV 5:11 “‘If he cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, he must bring as his offering for his sin which he has committed a tenth of an ephah of choice wheat flour for a sin offering. He must not place olive oil on it and he must not put frankincense on it, because it is a sin offering.
LEV 5:12 He must bring it to the priest and the priest must scoop out from it a handful as its memorial portion and offer it up in smoke on the altar on top of the other gifts of the Lord – it is a sin offering.
LEV 5:13 So the priest will make atonement on his behalf for his sin which he has committed by doing one of these things, and he will be forgiven. The remainder of the offering will belong to the priest like the grain offering.’”
LEV 5:14 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 5:15 “When a person commits a trespass and sins by straying unintentionally from the regulations about the Lord’s holy things, then he must bring his penalty for guilt to the Lord, a flawless ram from the flock, convertible into silver shekels according to the standard of the sanctuary shekel, for a guilt offering.
LEV 5:16 And whatever holy thing he violated he must restore and must add one fifth to it and give it to the priest. So the priest will make atonement on his behalf with the guilt offering ram and he will be forgiven.”
LEV 5:17 “If a person sins and violates any of the Lord’s commandments which must not be violated (although he did not know it at the time, but later realizes he is guilty), then he will bear his punishment for iniquity
LEV 5:18 and must bring a flawless ram from the flock, convertible into silver shekels, for a guilt offering to the priest. So the priest will make atonement on his behalf for his error which he committed (although he himself had not known it) and he will be forgiven.
LEV 5:19 It is a guilt offering; he was surely guilty before the Lord.”
LEV 6:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 6:2 “When a person sins and commits a trespass against the Lord by deceiving his fellow citizen in regard to something held in trust, or a pledge, or something stolen, or by extorting something from his fellow citizen,
LEV 6:3 or has found something lost and denies it and swears falsely concerning any one of the things that someone might do to sin –
LEV 6:4 when it happens that he sins and he is found guilty, then he must return whatever he had stolen, or whatever he had extorted, or the thing that he had held in trust, or the lost thing that he had found,
LEV 6:5 or anything about which he swears falsely. He must restore it in full and add one fifth to it; he must give it to its owner when he is found guilty.
LEV 6:6 Then he must bring his guilt offering to the Lord, a flawless ram from the flock, convertible into silver shekels, for a guilt offering to the priest.
LEV 6:7 So the priest will make atonement on his behalf before the Lord and he will be forgiven for whatever he has done to become guilty.”
LEV 6:8 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 6:9 “Command Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the law of the burnt offering. The burnt offering is to remain on the hearth on the altar all night until morning, and the fire of the altar must be kept burning on it.
LEV 6:10 Then the priest must put on his linen robe and must put linen leggings over his bare flesh, and he must take up the fatty ashes of the burnt offering that the fire consumed on the altar, and he must place them beside the altar.
LEV 6:11 Then he must take off his clothes and put on other clothes, and he must bring the fatty ashes outside the camp to a ceremonially clean place,
LEV 6:12 but the fire which is on the altar must be kept burning on it. It must not be extinguished. So the priest must kindle wood on it morning by morning, and he must arrange the burnt offering on it and offer the fat of the peace offering up in smoke on it.
LEV 6:13 A continual fire must be kept burning on the altar. It must not be extinguished.
LEV 6:14 “‘This is the law of the grain offering. The sons of Aaron are to present it before the Lord in front of the altar,
LEV 6:15 and the priest must take up with his hand some of the choice wheat flour of the grain offering and some of its olive oil, and all of the frankincense that is on the grain offering, and he must offer its memorial portion up in smoke on the altar as a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 6:16 Aaron and his sons are to eat what is left over from it. It must be eaten unleavened in a holy place; they are to eat it in the courtyard of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 6:17 It must not be baked with yeast. I have given it as their portion from my gifts. It is most holy, like the sin offering and the guilt offering.
LEV 6:18 Every male among the sons of Aaron may eat it. It is a perpetual allotted portion throughout your generations from the gifts of the Lord. Anyone who touches these gifts must be holy.’”
LEV 6:19 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 6:20 “This is the offering of Aaron and his sons which they must present to the Lord on the day when he is anointed: a tenth of an ephah of choice wheat flour as a continual grain offering, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening.
LEV 6:21 It must be made with olive oil on a griddle and you must bring it well soaked, so you must present a grain offering of broken pieces as a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 6:22 The high priest who succeeds him from among his sons must do it. It is a perpetual statute; it must be offered up in smoke as a whole offering to the Lord.
LEV 6:23 Every grain offering of a priest must be a whole offering; it must not be eaten.”
LEV 6:24 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 6:25 “Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the law of the sin offering. In the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered the sin offering must be slaughtered before the Lord. It is most holy.
LEV 6:26 The priest who offers it for sin is to eat it. It must be eaten in a holy place, in the court of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 6:27 Anyone who touches its meat must be holy, and whoever spatters some of its blood on a garment, you must wash whatever he spatters it on in a holy place.
LEV 6:28 Any clay vessel it is boiled in must be broken, and if it was boiled in a bronze vessel, then that vessel must be rubbed out and rinsed in water.
LEV 6:29 Any male among the priests may eat it. It is most holy.
LEV 6:30 But any sin offering from which some of its blood is brought into the Meeting Tent to make atonement in the sanctuary must not be eaten. It must be burned up in the fire.
LEV 7:1 “‘This is the law of the guilt offering. It is most holy.
LEV 7:2 In the place where they slaughter the burnt offering they must slaughter the guilt offering, and the officiating priest must splash the blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 7:3 Then the one making the offering must present all its fat: the fatty tail, the fat covering the entrails,
LEV 7:4 the two kidneys and the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he must remove along with the kidneys).
LEV 7:5 Then the priest must offer them up in smoke on the altar as a gift to the Lord. It is a guilt offering.
LEV 7:6 Any male among the priests may eat it. It must be eaten in a holy place. It is most holy.
LEV 7:7 The law is the same for the sin offering and the guilt offering; it belongs to the priest who makes atonement with it.
LEV 7:8 “‘As for the priest who presents someone’s burnt offering, the hide of that burnt offering which he presented belongs to him.
LEV 7:9 Every grain offering which is baked in the oven or made in the pan or on the griddle belongs to the priest who presented it.
LEV 7:10 Every grain offering, whether mixed with olive oil or dry, belongs to all the sons of Aaron, each one alike.
LEV 7:11 “‘This is the law of the peace offering sacrifice which he is to present to the Lord.
LEV 7:12 If he presents it on account of thanksgiving, along with the thank offering sacrifice he must present unleavened loaves mixed with olive oil, unleavened wafers smeared with olive oil, and well soaked ring-shaped loaves made of choice wheat flour mixed with olive oil.
LEV 7:13 He must present this grain offering in addition to ring-shaped loaves of leavened bread which regularly accompany the sacrifice of his thanksgiving peace offering.
LEV 7:14 He must present one of each kind of grain offering as a contribution offering to the Lord; it belongs to the priest who splashes the blood of the peace offering.
LEV 7:15 The meat of his thanksgiving peace offering must be eaten on the day of his offering; he must not set any of it aside until morning.
LEV 7:16 “‘If his offering is a votive or freewill sacrifice, it may be eaten on the day he presents his sacrifice, and also the leftovers from it may be eaten on the next day,
LEV 7:17 but the leftovers from the meat of the sacrifice must be burned up in the fire on the third day.
LEV 7:18 If some of the meat of his peace offering sacrifice is ever eaten on the third day it will not be accepted; it will not be accounted to the one who presented it, since it is spoiled, and the person who eats from it will bear his punishment for iniquity.
LEV 7:19 The meat which touches anything ceremonially unclean must not be eaten; it must be burned up in the fire. As for ceremonially clean meat, everyone who is ceremonially clean may eat the meat.
LEV 7:20 The person who eats meat from the peace offering sacrifice which belongs to the Lord while his uncleanness persists will be cut off from his people.
LEV 7:21 When a person touches anything unclean (whether human uncleanness, or an unclean animal, or an unclean detestable creature) and eats some of the meat of the peace offering sacrifice which belongs to the Lord, that person will be cut off from his people.’”
LEV 7:22 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 7:23 “Tell the Israelites, ‘You must not eat any fat of an ox, sheep, or goat.
LEV 7:24 Moreover, the fat of an animal that has died of natural causes and the fat of an animal torn by beasts may be used for any other purpose, but you must certainly never eat it.
LEV 7:25 If anyone eats fat from the animal from which he presents a gift to the Lord, that person will be cut off from his people.
LEV 7:26 And you must not eat any blood of the birds or the domesticated land animals in any of the places where you live.
LEV 7:27 Any person who eats any blood – that person will be cut off from his people.’”
LEV 7:28 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 7:29 “Tell the Israelites, ‘The one who presents his peace offering sacrifice to the Lord must bring his offering to the Lord from his peace offering sacrifice.
LEV 7:30 With his own hands he must bring the Lord’s gifts. He must bring the fat with the breast to wave the breast as a wave offering before the Lord,
LEV 7:31 and the priest must offer the fat up in smoke on the altar, but the breast will belong to Aaron and his sons.
LEV 7:32 The right thigh you must give as a contribution offering to the priest from your peace offering sacrifices.
LEV 7:33 The one from Aaron’s sons who presents the blood of the peace offering and fat will have the right thigh as his share,
LEV 7:34 for the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution offering I have taken from the Israelites out of their peace offering sacrifices and have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons from the people of Israel as a perpetual allotted portion.’”
LEV 7:35 This is the allotment of Aaron and the allotment of his sons from the Lord’s gifts on the day Moses presented them to serve as priests to the Lord.
LEV 7:36 This is what the Lord commanded to give to them from the Israelites on the day Moses anointed them – a perpetual allotted portion throughout their generations.
LEV 7:37 This is the law for the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the ordination offering, and the peace offering sacrifice,
LEV 7:38 which the Lord commanded Moses on Mount Sinai on the day he commanded the Israelites to present their offerings to the Lord in the wilderness of Sinai.
LEV 8:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 8:2 “Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, the anointing oil, the sin offering bull, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread,
LEV 8:3 and assemble the whole congregation at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.”
LEV 8:4 So Moses did just as the Lord commanded him, and the congregation assembled at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 8:5 Then Moses said to the congregation: “This is what the Lord has commanded to be done.”
LEV 8:6 So Moses brought Aaron and his sons forward and washed them with water.
LEV 8:7 Then he put the tunic on Aaron, wrapped the sash around him, and clothed him with the robe. Next he put the ephod on him and placed on him the decorated band of the ephod, and fastened the ephod closely to him with the band.
LEV 8:8 He then set the breastpiece on him and put the Urim and Thummim into the breastpiece.
LEV 8:9 Finally, he set the turban on his head and attached the gold plate, the holy diadem, to the front of the turban just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 8:10 Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and everything in it, and so consecrated them.
LEV 8:11 Next he sprinkled some of it on the altar seven times and so anointed the altar, all its vessels, and the wash basin and its stand to consecrate them.
LEV 8:12 He then poured some of the anointing oil on the head of Aaron and anointed him to consecrate him.
LEV 8:13 Moses also brought forward Aaron’s sons, clothed them with tunics, wrapped sashes around them, and wrapped headbands on them just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 8:14 Then he brought near the sin offering bull and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the sin offering bull,
LEV 8:15 and he slaughtered it. Moses then took the blood and put it all around on the horns of the altar with his finger and decontaminated the altar, and he poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar and so consecrated it to make atonement on it.
LEV 8:16 Then he took all the fat on the entrails, the protruding lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and Moses offered it all up in smoke on the altar,
LEV 8:17 but the rest of the bull – its hide, its flesh, and its dung – he completely burned up outside the camp just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 8:18 Then he presented the burnt offering ram and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram,
LEV 8:19 and he slaughtered it. Moses then splashed the blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 8:20 Then he cut the ram into parts, and Moses offered the head, the parts, and the suet up in smoke,
LEV 8:21 but the entrails and the legs he washed with water, and Moses offered the whole ram up in smoke on the altar – it was a burnt offering for a soothing aroma, a gift to the Lord, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 8:22 Then he presented the second ram, the ram of ordination, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram
LEV 8:23 and he slaughtered it. Moses then took some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
LEV 8:24 Next he brought Aaron’s sons forward, and Moses put some of the blood on their right earlobes, on their right thumbs, and on the big toes of their right feet, and Moses splashed the rest of the blood against the altar’s sides.
LEV 8:25 Then he took the fat (the fatty tail, all the fat on the entrails, the protruding lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat ) and the right thigh,
LEV 8:26 and from the basket of unleavened bread that was before the Lord he took one unleavened loaf, one loaf of bread mixed with olive oil, and one wafer, and placed them on the fat parts and on the right thigh.
LEV 8:27 He then put all of them on the palms of Aaron and his sons, who waved them as a wave offering before the Lord.
LEV 8:28 Moses then took them from their palms and offered them up in smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering – they were an ordination offering for a soothing aroma; it was a gift to the Lord.
LEV 8:29 Finally, Moses took the breast and waved it as a wave offering before the Lord from the ram of ordination. It was Moses’ share just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 8:30 Then Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood which was on the altar and sprinkled it on Aaron and his garments, and on his sons and his sons’ garments with him. So he consecrated Aaron, his garments, and his sons and his sons’ garments with him.
LEV 8:31 Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons, “Boil the meat at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, and there you are to eat it and the bread which is in the ordination offering basket, just as I have commanded, saying, ‘Aaron and his sons are to eat it,’
LEV 8:32 but the remainder of the meat and the bread you must burn with fire.
LEV 8:33 And you must not go out from the entrance of the Meeting Tent for seven days, until the day when your days of ordination are completed, because you must be ordained over a seven-day period.
LEV 8:34 What has been done on this day the Lord has commanded to be done to make atonement for you.
LEV 8:35 You must reside at the entrance of the Meeting Tent day and night for seven days and keep the charge of the Lord so that you will not die, for this is what I have been commanded.”
LEV 8:36 So Aaron and his sons did all the things the Lord had commanded through Moses.
LEV 9:1 On the eighth day Moses summoned Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel,
LEV 9:2 and said to Aaron, “Take for yourself a bull calf for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, both flawless, and present them before the Lord.
LEV 9:3 Then tell the Israelites: ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering and a calf and lamb, both a year old and flawless, for a burnt offering,
LEV 9:4 and an ox and a ram for peace offerings to sacrifice before the Lord, and a grain offering mixed with olive oil, for today the Lord is going to appear to you.’”
LEV 9:5 So they took what Moses had commanded to the front of the Meeting Tent and the whole congregation presented them and stood before the Lord.
LEV 9:6 Then Moses said, “This is what the Lord has commanded you to do so that the glory of the Lord may appear to you.”
LEV 9:7 Moses then said to Aaron, “Approach the altar and make your sin offering and your burnt offering, and make atonement on behalf of yourself and on behalf of the people; and also make the people’s offering and make atonement on behalf of them just as the Lord has commanded.”
LEV 9:8 So Aaron approached the altar and slaughtered the sin offering calf which was for himself.
LEV 9:9 Then Aaron’s sons presented the blood to him and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar, and the rest of the blood he poured out at the base of the altar.
LEV 9:10 The fat and the kidneys and the protruding lobe of the liver from the sin offering he offered up in smoke on the altar just as the Lord had commanded Moses,
LEV 9:11 but the flesh and the hide he completely burned up outside the camp.
LEV 9:12 He then slaughtered the burnt offering, and his sons handed the blood to him and he splashed it against the altar’s sides.
LEV 9:13 The burnt offering itself they handed to him by its parts, including the head, and he offered them up in smoke on the altar,
LEV 9:14 and he washed the entrails and the legs and offered them up in smoke on top of the burnt offering on the altar.
LEV 9:15 Then he presented the people’s offering. He took the sin offering male goat which was for the people, slaughtered it, and performed a decontamination rite with it like the first one.
LEV 9:16 He then presented the burnt offering, and did it according to the standard regulation.
LEV 9:17 Next he presented the grain offering, filled his hand with some of it, and offered it up in smoke on the altar in addition to the morning burnt offering.
LEV 9:18 Then he slaughtered the ox and the ram – the peace offering sacrifices which were for the people – and Aaron’s sons handed the blood to him and he splashed it against the altar’s sides.
LEV 9:19 As for the fat parts from the ox and from the ram (the fatty tail, the fat covering the entrails, the kidneys, and the protruding lobe of the liver),
LEV 9:20 they set those on the breasts and he offered the fat parts up in smoke on the altar.
LEV 9:21 Finally Aaron waved the breasts and the right thigh as a wave offering before the Lord just as Moses had commanded.
LEV 9:22 Then Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them and descended from making the sin offering, the burnt offering, and the peace offering.
LEV 9:23 Moses and Aaron then entered into the Meeting Tent. When they came out, they blessed the people, and the glory of the Lord appeared to all the people.
LEV 9:24 Then fire went out from the presence of the Lord and consumed the burnt offering and the fat parts on the altar, and all the people saw it, so they shouted loudly and fell down with their faces to the ground.
LEV 10:1 Then Aaron’s sons, Nadab and Abihu, each took his fire pan and put fire in it, set incense on it, and presented strange fire before the Lord, which he had not commanded them to do.
LEV 10:2 So fire went out from the presence of the Lord and consumed them so that they died before the Lord.
LEV 10:3 Moses then said to Aaron, “This is what the Lord spoke: ‘Among the ones close to me I will show myself holy, and in the presence of all the people I will be honored.’” So Aaron kept silent.
LEV 10:4 Moses then called to Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel, Aaron’s uncle, and said to them, “Come near, carry your brothers away from the front of the sanctuary to a place outside the camp.”
LEV 10:5 So they came near and carried them away in their tunics to a place outside the camp just as Moses had spoken.
LEV 10:6 Then Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar his other two sons, “Do not dishevel the hair of your heads and do not tear your garments, so that you do not die and so that wrath does not come on the whole congregation. Your brothers, all the house of Israel, are to mourn the burning which the Lord has caused,
LEV 10:7 but you must not go out from the entrance of the Meeting Tent lest you die, for the Lord’s anointing oil is on you.” So they acted according to the word of Moses.
LEV 10:8 Then the Lord spoke to Aaron,
LEV 10:9 “Do not drink wine or strong drink, you and your sons with you, when you enter into the Meeting Tent, so that you do not die, which is a perpetual statute throughout your generations,
LEV 10:10 as well as to distinguish between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean,
LEV 10:11 and to teach the Israelites all the statutes that the Lord has spoken to them through Moses.”
LEV 10:12 Then Moses spoke to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his remaining sons, “Take the grain offering which remains from the gifts of the Lord and eat it unleavened beside the altar, for it is most holy.
LEV 10:13 You must eat it in a holy place because it is your allotted portion and the allotted portion of your sons from the gifts of the Lord, for this is what I have been commanded.
LEV 10:14 Also, the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution offering you must eat in a ceremonially clean place, you and your sons and daughters with you, for they have been given as your allotted portion and the allotted portion of your sons from the peace offering sacrifices of the Israelites.
LEV 10:15 The thigh of the contribution offering and the breast of the wave offering they must bring in addition to the gifts of the fat parts to wave them as a wave offering before the Lord, and it will belong to you and your sons with you for a perpetual statute just as the Lord has commanded.”
LEV 10:16 Later Moses sought diligently for the sin offering male goat, but it had actually been burnt. So he became angry at Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s remaining sons, saying,
LEV 10:17 “Why did you not eat the sin offering in the sanctuary? For it is most holy and he gave it to you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement on their behalf before the Lord.
LEV 10:18 See here! Its blood was not brought into the holy place within! You should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary just as I commanded!”
LEV 10:19 But Aaron spoke to Moses, “See here! Just today they presented their sin offering and their burnt offering before the Lord and such things as these have happened to me! If I had eaten a sin offering today would the Lord have been pleased?”
LEV 10:20 When Moses heard this explanation, he was satisfied.
LEV 11:1 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying to them,
LEV 11:2 “Tell the Israelites: ‘This is the kind of creature you may eat from among all the animals that are on the land.
LEV 11:3 You may eat any among the animals that has a divided hoof (the hooves are completely split in two ) and that also chews the cud.
LEV 11:4 However, you must not eat these from among those that chew the cud and have divided hooves: The camel is unclean to you because it chews the cud even though its hoof is not divided.
LEV 11:5 The rock badger is unclean to you because it chews the cud even though its hoof is not divided.
LEV 11:6 The hare is unclean to you because it chews the cud even though its hoof is not divided.
LEV 11:7 The pig is unclean to you because its hoof is divided (the hoof is completely split in two ), even though it does not chew the cud.
LEV 11:8 You must not eat from their meat and you must not touch their carcasses; they are unclean to you.
LEV 11:9 “‘These you can eat from all creatures that are in the water: Any creatures in the water that have both fins and scales, whether in the seas or in the streams, you may eat.
LEV 11:10 But any creatures that do not have both fins and scales, whether in the seas or in the streams, from all the swarming things of the water and from all the living creatures that are in the water, are detestable to you.
LEV 11:11 Since they are detestable to you, you must not eat their meat and their carcass you must detest.
LEV 11:12 Any creature in the water that does not have both fins and scales is detestable to you.
LEV 11:13 “‘These you are to detest from among the birds – they must not be eaten, because they are detestable: the griffon vulture, the bearded vulture, the black vulture,
LEV 11:14 the kite, the buzzard of any kind,
LEV 11:15 every kind of crow,
LEV 11:16 the eagle owl, the short-eared owl, the long-eared owl, the hawk of any kind,
LEV 11:17 the little owl, the cormorant, the screech owl,
LEV 11:18 the white owl, the scops owl, the osprey,
LEV 11:19 the stork, the heron of any kind, the hoopoe, and the bat.
LEV 11:20 “‘Every winged swarming thing that walks on all fours is detestable to you.
LEV 11:21 However, this you may eat from all the winged swarming things that walk on all fours, which have jointed legs to hop with on the land.
LEV 11:22 These you may eat from them: the locust of any kind, the bald locust of any kind, the cricket of any kind, the grasshopper of any kind.
LEV 11:23 But any other winged swarming thing that has four legs is detestable to you.
LEV 11:24 “‘By these you defile yourselves; anyone who touches their carcass will be unclean until the evening,
LEV 11:25 and anyone who carries their carcass must wash his clothes and will be unclean until the evening.
LEV 11:26 “‘All animals that divide the hoof but it is not completely split in two and do not chew the cud are unclean to you; anyone who touches them becomes unclean.
LEV 11:27 All that walk on their paws among all the creatures that walk on all fours are unclean to you. Anyone who touches their carcass will be unclean until the evening,
LEV 11:28 and the one who carries their carcass must wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening; they are unclean to you.
LEV 11:29 “‘Now this is what is unclean to you among the swarming things that swarm on the land: the rat, the mouse, the large lizard of any kind,
LEV 11:30 the Mediterranean gecko, the spotted lizard, the wall gecko, the skink, and the chameleon.
LEV 11:31 These are the ones that are unclean to you among all the swarming things. Anyone who touches them when they die will be unclean until evening.
LEV 11:32 Also, anything they fall on when they die will become unclean – any wood vessel or garment or article of leather or sackcloth. Any such vessel with which work is done must be immersed in water and will be unclean until the evening. Then it will become clean.
LEV 11:33 As for any clay vessel they fall into, everything in it will become unclean and you must break it.
LEV 11:34 Any food that may be eaten which becomes soaked with water will become unclean. Anything drinkable in any such vessel will become unclean.
LEV 11:35 Anything their carcass may fall on will become unclean. An oven or small stove must be smashed to pieces; they are unclean, and they will stay unclean to you.
LEV 11:36 However, a spring or a cistern which collects water will be clean, but one who touches their carcass will be unclean.
LEV 11:37 Now, if such a carcass falls on any sowing seed which is to be sown, it is clean,
LEV 11:38 but if water is put on the seed and such a carcass falls on it, it is unclean to you.
LEV 11:39 “‘Now if an animal that you may eat dies, whoever touches its carcass will be unclean until the evening.
LEV 11:40 One who eats from its carcass must wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening, and whoever carries its carcass must wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening.
LEV 11:41 Every swarming thing that swarms on the land is detestable; it must not be eaten.
LEV 11:42 You must not eat anything that crawls on its belly or anything that walks on all fours or on any number of legs of all the swarming things that swarm on the land, because they are detestable.
LEV 11:43 Do not make yourselves detestable by any of the swarming things. You must not defile yourselves by them and become unclean by them,
LEV 11:44 for I am the Lord your God and you are to sanctify yourselves and be holy because I am holy. You must not defile yourselves by any of the swarming things that creep on the ground,
LEV 11:45 for I am the Lord who brought you up from the land of Egypt to be your God, and you are to be holy because I am holy.
LEV 11:46 This is the law of the land animals, the birds, all the living creatures that move in the water, and all the creatures that swarm on the land,
LEV 11:47 to distinguish between the unclean and the clean, between the living creatures that may be eaten and the living creatures that must not be eaten.’”
LEV 12:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 12:2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘When a woman produces offspring and bears a male child, she will be unclean seven days, as she is unclean during the days of her menstruation.
LEV 12:3 On the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin must be circumcised.
LEV 12:4 Then she will remain thirty-three days in blood purity. She must not touch anything holy and she must not enter the sanctuary until the days of her purification are fulfilled.
LEV 12:5 If she bears a female child, she will be impure fourteen days as during her menstrual flow, and she will remain sixty-six days in blood purity.
LEV 12:6 “‘When the days of her purification are completed for a son or for a daughter, she must bring a one year old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or turtledove for a sin offering to the entrance of the Meeting Tent, to the priest.
LEV 12:7 The priest is to present it before the Lord and make atonement on her behalf, and she will be clean from her flow of blood. This is the law of the one who bears a child, for the male or the female child.
LEV 12:8 If she cannot afford a sheep, then she must take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and one for a sin offering, and the priest is to make atonement on her behalf, and she will be clean.’”
LEV 13:1 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
LEV 13:2 “When someone has a swelling or a scab or a bright spot on the skin of his body that may become a diseased infection, he must be brought to Aaron the priest or one of his sons, the priests.
LEV 13:3 The priest must then examine the infection on the skin of the body, and if the hair in the infection has turned white and the infection appears to be deeper than the skin of the body, then it is a diseased infection, so when the priest examines it he must pronounce the person unclean.
LEV 13:4 “If it is a white bright spot on the skin of his body, but it does not appear to be deeper than the skin, and the hair has not turned white, then the priest is to quarantine the person with the infection for seven days.
LEV 13:5 The priest must then examine it on the seventh day, and if, as far as he can see, the infection has stayed the same and has not spread on the skin, then the priest is to quarantine the person for another seven days.
LEV 13:6 The priest must then examine it again on the seventh day, and if the infection has faded and has not spread on the skin, then the priest is to pronounce the person clean. It is a scab, so he must wash his clothes and be clean.
LEV 13:7 If, however, the scab is spreading further on the skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his purification, then he must show himself to the priest a second time.
LEV 13:8 The priest must then examine it, and if the scab has spread on the skin, then the priest is to pronounce the person unclean. It is a disease.
LEV 13:9 “When someone has a diseased infection, he must be brought to the priest.
LEV 13:10 The priest will then examine it, and if a white swelling is on the skin, it has turned the hair white, and there is raw flesh in the swelling,
LEV 13:11 it is a chronic disease on the skin of his body, so the priest is to pronounce him unclean. The priest must not merely quarantine him, for he is unclean.
LEV 13:12 If, however, the disease breaks out on the skin so that the disease covers all the skin of the person with the infection from his head to his feet, as far as the priest can see,
LEV 13:13 the priest must then examine it, and if the disease covers his whole body, he is to pronounce the person with the infection clean. He has turned all white, so he is clean.
LEV 13:14 But whenever raw flesh appears in it he will be unclean,
LEV 13:15 so the priest is to examine the raw flesh and pronounce him unclean – it is diseased.
LEV 13:16 If, however, the raw flesh once again turns white, then he must come to the priest.
LEV 13:17 The priest will then examine it, and if the infection has turned white, the priest is to pronounce the person with the infection clean – he is clean.
LEV 13:18 “When someone’s body has a boil on its skin and it heals,
LEV 13:19 and in the place of the boil there is a white swelling or a reddish white bright spot, he must show himself to the priest.
LEV 13:20 The priest will then examine it, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and its hair has turned white, then the priest is to pronounce the person unclean. It is a diseased infection that has broken out in the boil.
LEV 13:21 If, however, the priest examines it, and there is no white hair in it, it is not deeper than the skin, and it has faded, then the priest is to quarantine him for seven days.
LEV 13:22 If it is spreading further on the skin, then the priest is to pronounce him unclean. It is an infection.
LEV 13:23 But if the bright spot stays in its place and has not spread, it is the scar of the boil, so the priest is to pronounce him clean.
LEV 13:24 “When a body has a burn on its skin and the raw area of the burn becomes a reddish white or white bright spot,
LEV 13:25 the priest must examine it, and if the hair has turned white in the bright spot and it appears to be deeper than the skin, it is a disease that has broken out in the burn. The priest is to pronounce the person unclean. It is a diseased infection.
LEV 13:26 If, however, the priest examines it and there is no white hair in the bright spot, it is not deeper than the skin, and it has faded, then the priest is to quarantine him for seven days.
LEV 13:27 The priest must then examine it on the seventh day, and if it is spreading further on the skin, then the priest is to pronounce him unclean. It is a diseased infection.
LEV 13:28 But if the bright spot stays in its place, has not spread on the skin, and it has faded, then it is the swelling of the burn, so the priest is to pronounce him clean, because it is the scar of the burn.
LEV 13:29 “When a man or a woman has an infection on the head or in the beard,
LEV 13:30 the priest is to examine the infection, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair in it is reddish yellow and thin, then the priest is to pronounce the person unclean. It is scall, a disease of the head or the beard.
LEV 13:31 But if the priest examines the scall infection and it does not appear to be deeper than the skin, and there is no black hair in it, then the priest is to quarantine the person with the scall infection for seven days.
LEV 13:32 The priest must then examine the infection on the seventh day, and if the scall has not spread, there is no reddish yellow hair in it, and the scall does not appear to be deeper than the skin,
LEV 13:33 then the individual is to shave himself, but he must not shave the area affected by the scall, and the priest is to quarantine the person with the scall for another seven days.
LEV 13:34 The priest must then examine the scall on the seventh day, and if the scall has not spread on the skin and it does not appear to be deeper than the skin, then the priest is to pronounce him clean. So he is to wash his clothes and be clean.
LEV 13:35 If, however, the scall spreads further on the skin after his purification,
LEV 13:36 then the priest is to examine it, and if the scall has spread on the skin the priest is not to search further for reddish yellow hair. The person is unclean.
LEV 13:37 If, as far as the priest can see, the scall has stayed the same and black hair has sprouted in it, the scall has been healed; the person is clean. So the priest is to pronounce him clean.
LEV 13:38 “When a man or a woman has bright spots – white bright spots – on the skin of their body,
LEV 13:39 the priest is to examine them, and if the bright spots on the skin of their body are faded white, it is a harmless rash that has broken out on the skin. The person is clean.
LEV 13:40 “When a man’s head is bare so that he is balding in back, he is clean.
LEV 13:41 If his head is bare on the forehead so that he is balding in front, he is clean.
LEV 13:42 But if there is a reddish white infection in the back or front bald area, it is a disease breaking out in his back or front bald area.
LEV 13:43 The priest is to examine it, and if the swelling of the infection is reddish white in the back or front bald area like the appearance of a disease on the skin of the body,
LEV 13:44 he is a diseased man. He is unclean. The priest must surely pronounce him unclean because of his infection on his head.
LEV 13:45 “As for the diseased person who has the infection, his clothes must be torn, the hair of his head must be unbound, he must cover his mustache, and he must call out ‘Unclean! Unclean!’
LEV 13:46 The whole time he has the infection he will be continually unclean. He must live in isolation, and his place of residence must be outside the camp.
LEV 13:47 “When a garment has a diseased infection in it, whether a wool or linen garment,
LEV 13:48 or in the warp or woof of the linen or the wool, or in leather or anything made of leather,
LEV 13:49 if the infection in the garment or leather or warp or woof or any article of leather is yellowish green or reddish, it is a diseased infection and it must be shown to the priest.
LEV 13:50 The priest is to examine and then quarantine the article with the infection for seven days.
LEV 13:51 He must then examine the infection on the seventh day. If the infection has spread in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in the leather – whatever the article into which the leather was made – the infection is a malignant disease. It is unclean.
LEV 13:52 He must burn the garment or the warp or the woof, whether wool or linen, or any article of leather which has the infection in it. Because it is a malignant disease it must be burned up in the fire.
LEV 13:53 But if the priest examines it and the infection has not spread in the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of leather,
LEV 13:54 the priest is to command that they wash whatever has the infection and quarantine it for another seven days.
LEV 13:55 The priest must then examine it after the infection has been washed out, and if the infection has not changed its appearance even though the infection has not spread, it is unclean. You must burn it up in the fire. It is a fungus, whether on the back side or front side of the article.
LEV 13:56 But if the priest has examined it and the infection has faded after it has been washed, he is to tear it out of the garment or the leather or the warp or the woof.
LEV 13:57 Then if it still appears again in the garment or the warp or the woof, or in any article of leather, it is an outbreak. Whatever has the infection in it you must burn up in the fire.
LEV 13:58 But the garment or the warp or the woof or any article of leather which you wash and infection disappears from it is to be washed a second time and it will be clean.”
LEV 13:59 This is the law of the diseased infection in the garment of wool or linen, or the warp or woof, or any article of leather, for pronouncing it clean or unclean.
LEV 14:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 14:2 “This is the law of the diseased person on the day of his purification, when he is brought to the priest.
LEV 14:3 The priest is to go outside the camp and examine the infection. If the infection of the diseased person has been healed,
LEV 14:4 then the priest will command that two live clean birds, a piece of cedar wood, a scrap of crimson fabric, and some twigs of hyssop be taken up for the one being cleansed.
LEV 14:5 The priest will then command that one bird be slaughtered into a clay vessel over fresh water.
LEV 14:6 Then he is to take the live bird along with the piece of cedar wood, the scrap of crimson fabric, and the twigs of hyssop, and he is to dip them and the live bird in the blood of the bird slaughtered over the fresh water,
LEV 14:7 and sprinkle it seven times on the one being cleansed from the disease, pronounce him clean, and send the live bird away over the open countryside.
LEV 14:8 “The one being cleansed must then wash his clothes, shave off all his hair, and bathe in water, and so be clean. Then afterward he may enter the camp, but he must live outside his tent seven days.
LEV 14:9 When the seventh day comes he must shave all his hair – his head, his beard, his eyebrows, all his hair – and he must wash his clothes, bathe his body in water, and so be clean.
LEV 14:10 “On the eighth day he must take two flawless male lambs, one flawless yearling female lamb, three-tenths of an ephah of choice wheat flour as a grain offering mixed with olive oil, and one log of olive oil,
LEV 14:11 and the priest who pronounces him clean will have the man who is being cleansed stand along with these offerings before the Lord at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.
LEV 14:12 “The priest is to take one male lamb and present it for a guilt offering along with the log of olive oil and present them as a wave offering before the Lord.
LEV 14:13 He must then slaughter the male lamb in the place where the sin offering and the burnt offering are slaughtered, in the sanctuary, because, like the sin offering, the guilt offering belongs to the priest; it is most holy.
LEV 14:14 Then the priest is to take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one being cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
LEV 14:15 The priest will then take some of the log of olive oil and pour it into his own left hand.
LEV 14:16 Then the priest is to dip his right forefinger into the olive oil that is in his left hand, and sprinkle some of the olive oil with his finger seven times before the Lord.
LEV 14:17 The priest will then put some of the rest of the olive oil that is in his hand on the right earlobe of the one being cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on the blood of the guilt offering,
LEV 14:18 and the remainder of the olive oil that is in his hand the priest is to put on the head of the one being cleansed. So the priest is to make atonement for him before the Lord.
LEV 14:19 “The priest must then perform the sin offering and make atonement for the one being cleansed from his impurity. After that he is to slaughter the burnt offering,
LEV 14:20 and the priest is to offer the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar. So the priest is to make atonement for him and he will be clean.
LEV 14:21 “If the person is poor and does not have sufficient means, he must take one male lamb as a guilt offering for a wave offering to make atonement for himself, one-tenth of an ephah of choice wheat flour mixed with olive oil for a grain offering, a log of olive oil,
LEV 14:22 and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, which are within his means. One will be a sin offering and the other a burnt offering.
LEV 14:23 “On the eighth day he must bring them for his purification to the priest at the entrance of the Meeting Tent before the Lord,
LEV 14:24 and the priest is to take the male lamb of the guilt offering and the log of olive oil and wave them as a wave offering before the Lord.
LEV 14:25 Then he is to slaughter the male lamb of the guilt offering, and the priest is to take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one being cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
LEV 14:26 The priest will then pour some of the olive oil into his own left hand,
LEV 14:27 and sprinkle some of the olive oil that is in his left hand with his right forefinger seven times before the Lord.
LEV 14:28 Then the priest is to put some of the olive oil that is in his hand on the right earlobe of the one being cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on the place of the blood of the guilt offering,
LEV 14:29 and the remainder of the olive oil that is in the hand of the priest he is to put on the head of the one being cleansed to make atonement for him before the Lord.
LEV 14:30 “He will then make one of the turtledoves or young pigeons, which are within his means,
LEV 14:31 a sin offering and the other a burnt offering along with the grain offering. So the priest is to make atonement for the one being cleansed before the Lord.
LEV 14:32 This is the law of the one in whom there is a diseased infection, who does not have sufficient means for his purification.”
LEV 14:33 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
LEV 14:34 “When you enter the land of Canaan which I am about to give to you for a possession, and I put a diseased infection in a house in the land you are to possess,
LEV 14:35 then whoever owns the house must come and declare to the priest, ‘Something like an infection is visible to me in the house.’
LEV 14:36 Then the priest will command that the house be cleared before the priest enters to examine the infection so that everything in the house does not become unclean, and afterward the priest will enter to examine the house.
LEV 14:37 He is to examine the infection, and if the infection in the walls of the house consists of yellowish green or reddish eruptions, and it appears to be deeper than the surface of the wall,
LEV 14:38 then the priest is to go out of the house to the doorway of the house and quarantine the house for seven days.
LEV 14:39 The priest must return on the seventh day and examine it, and if the infection has spread in the walls of the house,
LEV 14:40 then the priest is to command that the stones that had the infection in them be pulled and thrown outside the city into an unclean place.
LEV 14:41 Then he is to have the house scraped all around on the inside, and the plaster which is scraped off must be dumped outside the city into an unclean place.
LEV 14:42 They are then to take other stones and replace those stones, and he is to take other plaster and replaster the house.
LEV 14:43 “If the infection returns and breaks out in the house after he has pulled out the stones, scraped the house, and it is replastered,
LEV 14:44 the priest is to come and examine it, and if the infection has spread in the house, it is a malignant disease in the house. It is unclean.
LEV 14:45 He must tear down the house, its stones, its wood, and all the plaster of the house, and bring all of it outside the city to an unclean place.
LEV 14:46 Anyone who enters the house all the days the priest has quarantined it will be unclean until evening.
LEV 14:47 Anyone who lies down in the house must wash his clothes. Anyone who eats in the house must wash his clothes.
LEV 14:48 “If, however, the priest enters and examines it, and the infection has not spread in the house after the house has been replastered, then the priest is to pronounce the house clean because the infection has been healed.
LEV 14:49 Then he is to take two birds, a piece of cedar wood, a scrap of crimson fabric, and some twigs of hyssop to decontaminate the house,
LEV 14:50 and he is to slaughter one bird into a clay vessel over fresh water.
LEV 14:51 He must then take the piece of cedar wood, the twigs of hyssop, the scrap of crimson fabric, and the live bird, and dip them in the blood of the slaughtered bird and in the fresh water, and sprinkle the house seven times.
LEV 14:52 So he is to decontaminate the house with the blood of the bird, the fresh water, the live bird, the piece of cedar wood, the twigs of hyssop, and the scrap of crimson fabric,
LEV 14:53 and he is to send the live bird away outside the city into the open countryside. So he is to make atonement for the house and it will be clean.
LEV 14:54 “This is the law for all diseased infections, for scall,
LEV 14:55 for the diseased garment, for the house,
LEV 14:56 for the swelling, for the scab, and for the bright spot,
LEV 14:57 to teach when something is unclean and when it is clean. This is the law for dealing with infectious disease.”
LEV 15:1 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
LEV 15:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When any man has a discharge from his body, his discharge is unclean.
LEV 15:3 Now this is his uncleanness in regard to his discharge – whether his body secretes his discharge or blocks his discharge, he is unclean. All the days that his body has a discharge or his body blocks his discharge, this is his uncleanness.
LEV 15:4 “‘Any bed the man with a discharge lies on will be unclean, and any furniture he sits on will be unclean.
LEV 15:5 Anyone who touches his bed must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:6 The one who sits on the furniture the man with a discharge sits on must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:7 The one who touches the body of the man with a discharge must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:8 If the man with a discharge spits on a person who is ceremonially clean, that person must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:9 Any means of riding the man with a discharge rides on will be unclean.
LEV 15:10 Anyone who touches anything that was under him will be unclean until evening, and the one who carries those items must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:11 Anyone whom the man with the discharge touches without having rinsed his hands in water must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:12 A clay vessel which the man with the discharge touches must be broken, and any wooden utensil must be rinsed in water.
LEV 15:13 “‘When the man with the discharge becomes clean from his discharge he is to count off for himself seven days for his purification, and he must wash his clothes, bathe in fresh water, and be clean.
LEV 15:14 Then on the eighth day he is to take for himself two turtledoves or two young pigeons, and he is to present himself before the Lord at the entrance of the Meeting Tent and give them to the priest,
LEV 15:15 and the priest is to make one of them a sin offering and the other a burnt offering. So the priest is to make atonement for him before the Lord for his discharge.
LEV 15:16 “‘When a man has a seminal emission, he must bathe his whole body in water and be unclean until evening,
LEV 15:17 and he must wash in water any clothing or leather that has semen on it, and it will be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:18 When a man has sexual intercourse with a woman and there is a seminal emission, they must bathe in water and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:19 “‘When a woman has a discharge and her discharge is blood from her body, she is to be in her menstruation seven days, and anyone who touches her will be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:20 Anything she lies on during her menstruation will be unclean, and anything she sits on will be unclean.
LEV 15:21 Anyone who touches her bed must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:22 Anyone who touches any furniture she sits on must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:23 If there is something on the bed or on the furniture she sits on, when he touches it he will be unclean until evening,
LEV 15:24 and if a man actually has sexual intercourse with her so that her menstrual impurity touches him, then he will be unclean seven days and any bed he lies on will be unclean.
LEV 15:25 “‘When a woman’s discharge of blood flows many days not at the time of her menstruation, or if it flows beyond the time of her menstruation, all the days of her discharge of impurity will be like the days of her menstruation – she is unclean.
LEV 15:26 Any bed she lies on all the days of her discharge will be to her like the bed of her menstruation, any furniture she sits on will be unclean like the impurity of her menstruation,
LEV 15:27 and anyone who touches them will be unclean, and he must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
LEV 15:28 “‘If she becomes clean from her discharge, then she is to count off for herself seven days, and afterward she will be clean.
LEV 15:29 Then on the eighth day she must take for herself two turtledoves or two young pigeons and she must bring them to the priest at the entrance of the Meeting Tent,
LEV 15:30 and the priest is to make one a sin offering and the other a burnt offering. So the priest is to make atonement for her before the Lord from her discharge of impurity.
LEV 15:31 “‘Thus you are to set the Israelites apart from their impurity so that they do not die in their impurity by defiling my tabernacle which is in their midst.
LEV 15:32 This is the law of the one with a discharge: the one who has a seminal emission and becomes unclean by it,
LEV 15:33 the one who is sick in her menstruation, the one with a discharge, whether male or female, and a man who has sexual intercourse with an unclean woman.’”
LEV 16:1 The Lord spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron’s two sons when they approached the presence of the Lord and died,
LEV 16:2 and the Lord said to Moses: “Tell Aaron your brother that he must not enter at any time into the holy place inside the veil-canopy in front of the atonement plate that is on the ark so that he may not die, for I will appear in the cloud over the atonement plate.
LEV 16:3 “In this way Aaron is to enter into the sanctuary – with a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering.
LEV 16:4 He must put on a holy linen tunic, linen leggings are to cover his body, and he is to wrap himself with a linen sash and wrap his head with a linen turban. They are holy garments, so he must bathe his body in water and put them on.
LEV 16:5 He must also take two male goats from the congregation of the Israelites for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering.
LEV 16:6 Then Aaron is to present the sin offering bull which is for himself and is to make atonement on behalf of himself and his household.
LEV 16:7 He must then take the two goats and stand them before the Lord at the entrance of the Meeting Tent,
LEV 16:8 and Aaron is to cast lots over the two goats, one lot for the Lord and one lot for Azazel.
LEV 16:9 Aaron must then present the goat which has been designated by lot for the Lord, and he is to make it a sin offering,
LEV 16:10 but the goat which has been designated by lot for Azazel is to be stood alive before the Lord to make atonement on it by sending it away to Azazel into the wilderness.
LEV 16:11 “Aaron is to present the sin offering bull which is for himself, and he is to make atonement on behalf of himself and his household. He is to slaughter the sin offering bull which is for himself,
LEV 16:12 and take a censer full of coals of fire from the altar before the Lord and a full double handful of finely ground fragrant incense, and bring them inside the veil-canopy.
LEV 16:13 He must then put the incense on the fire before the Lord, and the cloud of incense will cover the atonement plate which is above the ark of the testimony, so that he will not die.
LEV 16:14 Then he is to take some of the blood of the bull and sprinkle it with his finger on the eastern face of the atonement plate, and in front of the atonement plate he is to sprinkle some of the blood seven times with his finger.
LEV 16:15 “He must then slaughter the sin offering goat which is for the people. He is to bring its blood inside the veil-canopy, and he is to do with its blood just as he did to the blood of the bull: He is to sprinkle it on the atonement plate and in front of the atonement plate.
LEV 16:16 So he is to make atonement for the holy place from the impurities of the Israelites and from their transgressions with regard to all their sins, and thus he is to do for the Meeting Tent which resides with them in the midst of their impurities.
LEV 16:17 Nobody is to be in the Meeting Tent when he enters to make atonement in the holy place until he goes out, and he has made atonement on his behalf, on behalf of his household, and on behalf of the whole assembly of Israel.
LEV 16:18 “Then he is to go out to the altar which is before the Lord and make atonement for it. He is to take some of the blood of the bull and some of the blood of the goat, and put it all around on the horns of the altar.
LEV 16:19 Then he is to sprinkle on it some of the blood with his finger seven times, and cleanse and consecrate it from the impurities of the Israelites.
LEV 16:20 “When he has finished purifying the holy place, the Meeting Tent, and the altar, he is to present the live goat.
LEV 16:21 Aaron is to lay his two hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the iniquities of the Israelites and all their transgressions in regard to all their sins, and thus he is to put them on the head of the goat and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man standing ready.
LEV 16:22 The goat is to bear on itself all their iniquities into an inaccessible land, so he is to send the goat away in the wilderness.
LEV 16:23 “Aaron must then enter the Meeting Tent and take off the linen garments which he had put on when he entered the sanctuary, and leave them there.
LEV 16:24 Then he must bathe his body in water in a holy place, put on his clothes, and go out and make his burnt offering and the people’s burnt offering. So he is to make atonement on behalf of himself and the people.
LEV 16:25 “Then he is to offer up the fat of the sin offering in smoke on the altar,
LEV 16:26 and the one who sent the goat away to Azazel must wash his clothes, bathe his body in water, and afterward he may reenter the camp.
LEV 16:27 The bull of the sin offering and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought to make atonement in the holy place, must be brought outside the camp and their hide, their flesh, and their dung must be burned up,
LEV 16:28 and the one who burns them must wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and afterward he may reenter the camp.
LEV 16:29 “This is to be a perpetual statute for you. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, you must humble yourselves and do no work of any kind, both the native citizen and the foreigner who resides in your midst,
LEV 16:30 for on this day atonement is to be made for you to cleanse you from all your sins; you must be clean before the Lord.
LEV 16:31 It is to be a Sabbath of complete rest for you, and you must humble yourselves. It is a perpetual statute.
LEV 16:32 “The priest who is anointed and ordained to act as high priest in place of his father is to make atonement. He is to put on the linen garments, the holy garments,
LEV 16:33 and he is to purify the Most Holy Place, he is to purify the Meeting Tent and the altar, and he is to make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly.
LEV 16:34 This is to be a perpetual statute for you to make atonement for the Israelites for all their sins once a year.” So he did just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 17:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 17:2 “Speak to Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites, and tell them: ‘This is the word that the Lord has commanded:
LEV 17:3 “Blood guilt will be accounted to any man from the house of Israel who slaughters an ox or a lamb or a goat inside the camp or outside the camp,
LEV 17:4 but has not brought it to the entrance of the Meeting Tent to present it as an offering to the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord. He has shed blood, so that man will be cut off from the midst of his people.
LEV 17:5 This is so that the Israelites will bring their sacrifices that they are sacrificing in the open field to the Lord at the entrance of the Meeting Tent to the priest and sacrifice them there as peace offering sacrifices to the Lord.
LEV 17:6 The priest is to splash the blood on the altar of the Lord at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, and offer the fat up in smoke for a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 17:7 So they must no longer offer their sacrifices to the goat demons, acting like prostitutes by going after them. This is to be a perpetual statute for them throughout their generations.
LEV 17:8 “You are to say to them: ‘Any man from the house of Israel or from the foreigners who reside in their midst, who offers a burnt offering or a sacrifice
LEV 17:9 but does not bring it to the entrance of the Meeting Tent to offer it to the Lord – that person will be cut off from his people.
LEV 17:10 “‘Any man from the house of Israel or from the foreigners who reside in their midst who eats any blood, I will set my face against that person who eats the blood, and I will cut him off from the midst of his people,
LEV 17:11 for the life of every living thing is in the blood. So I myself have assigned it to you on the altar to make atonement for your lives, for the blood makes atonement by means of the life.
LEV 17:12 Therefore, I have said to the Israelites: No person among you is to eat blood, and no resident foreigner who lives among you is to eat blood.
LEV 17:13 “‘Any man from the Israelites or from the foreigners who reside in their midst who hunts a wild animal or a bird that may be eaten must pour out its blood and cover it with soil,
LEV 17:14 for the life of all flesh is its blood. So I have said to the Israelites: You must not eat the blood of any living thing because the life of every living thing is its blood – all who eat it will be cut off.
LEV 17:15 “‘Any person who eats an animal that has died of natural causes or an animal torn by beasts, whether a native citizen or a foreigner, must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening; then he becomes clean.
LEV 17:16 But if he does not wash his clothes and does not bathe his body, he will bear his punishment for iniquity.’”
LEV 18:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 18:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘I am the Lord your God!
LEV 18:3 You must not do as they do in the land of Egypt where you have been living, and you must not do as they do in the land of Canaan into which I am about to bring you; you must not walk in their statutes.
LEV 18:4 You must observe my regulations and you must be sure to walk in my statutes. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 18:5 So you must keep my statutes and my regulations; anyone who does so will live by keeping them. I am the Lord.
LEV 18:6 “‘No man is to approach any close relative to have sexual intercourse with her. I am the Lord.
LEV 18:7 You must not expose your father’s nakedness by having sexual intercourse with your mother. She is your mother; you must not have intercourse with her.
LEV 18:8 You must not have sexual intercourse with your father’s wife; she is your father’s nakedness.
LEV 18:9 You must not have sexual intercourse with your sister, whether she is your father’s daughter or your mother’s daughter, whether she is born in the same household or born outside it; you must not have sexual intercourse with either of them.
LEV 18:10 You must not expose the nakedness of your son’s daughter or your daughter’s daughter by having sexual intercourse with them, because they are your own nakedness.
LEV 18:11 You must not have sexual intercourse with the daughter of your father’s wife born of your father; she is your sister. You must not have intercourse with her.
LEV 18:12 You must not have sexual intercourse with your father’s sister; she is your father’s flesh.
LEV 18:13 You must not have sexual intercourse with your mother’s sister, because she is your mother’s flesh.
LEV 18:14 You must not expose the nakedness of your father’s brother; you must not approach his wife to have sexual intercourse with her. She is your aunt.
LEV 18:15 You must not have sexual intercourse with your daughter-in-law; she is your son’s wife. You must not have intercourse with her.
LEV 18:16 You must not have sexual intercourse with your brother’s wife; she is your brother’s nakedness.
LEV 18:17 You must not have sexual intercourse with both a woman and her daughter; you must not take as wife either her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter to have intercourse with them. They are closely related to her – it is lewdness.
LEV 18:18 You must not take a woman in marriage and then marry her sister as a rival wife while she is still alive, to have sexual intercourse with her.
LEV 18:19 “‘You must not approach a woman in her menstrual impurity to have sexual intercourse with her.
LEV 18:20 You must not have sexual intercourse with the wife of your fellow citizen to become unclean with her.
LEV 18:21 You must not give any of your children as an offering to Molech, so that you do not profane the name of your God. I am the Lord!
LEV 18:22 You must not have sexual intercourse with a male as one has sexual intercourse with a woman; it is a detestable act.
LEV 18:23 You must not have sexual intercourse with any animal to become defiled with it, and a woman must not stand before an animal to have sexual intercourse with it; it is a perversion.
LEV 18:24 “‘Do not defile yourselves with any of these things, for the nations which I am about to drive out before you have been defiled with all these things.
LEV 18:25 Therefore the land has become unclean and I have brought the punishment for its iniquity upon it, so that the land has vomited out its inhabitants.
LEV 18:26 You yourselves must obey my statutes and my regulations and must not do any of these abominations, both the native citizen and the resident foreigner in your midst,
LEV 18:27 for the people who were in the land before you have done all these abominations, and the land has become unclean.
LEV 18:28 So do not make the land vomit you out because you defile it just as it has vomited out the nations that were before you.
LEV 18:29 For if anyone does any of these abominations, the persons who do them will be cut off from the midst of their people.
LEV 18:30 You must obey my charge to not practice any of the abominable statutes that have been done before you, so that you do not defile yourselves by them. I am the Lord your God.’”
LEV 19:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 19:2 “Speak to the whole congregation of the Israelites and tell them, ‘You must be holy because I, the Lord your God, am holy.
LEV 19:3 Each of you must respect his mother and his father, and you must keep my Sabbaths. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 19:4 Do not turn to idols, and you must not make for yourselves gods of cast metal. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 19:5 “‘When you sacrifice a peace offering sacrifice to the Lord, you must sacrifice it so that it is accepted for you.
LEV 19:6 It must be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the following day, but what is left over until the third day must be burned up.
LEV 19:7 If, however, it is eaten on the third day, it is spoiled, it will not be accepted,
LEV 19:8 and the one who eats it will bear his punishment for iniquity because he has profaned what is holy to the Lord. That person will be cut off from his people.
LEV 19:9 “‘When you gather in the harvest of your land, you must not completely harvest the corner of your field, and you must not gather up the gleanings of your harvest.
LEV 19:10 You must not pick your vineyard bare, and you must not gather up the fallen grapes of your vineyard. You must leave them for the poor and the foreigner. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 19:11 “‘You must not steal, you must not tell lies, and you must not deal falsely with your fellow citizen.
LEV 19:12 You must not swear falsely in my name, so that you do not profane the name of your God. I am the Lord.
LEV 19:13 You must not oppress your neighbor or commit robbery against him. You must not withhold the wages of the hired laborer overnight until morning.
LEV 19:14 You must not curse a deaf person or put a stumbling block in front of a blind person. You must fear your God; I am the Lord.
LEV 19:15 “‘You must not deal unjustly in judgment: you must neither show partiality to the poor nor honor the rich. You must judge your fellow citizen fairly.
LEV 19:16 You must not go about as a slanderer among your people. You must not stand idly by when your neighbor’s life is at stake. I am the Lord.
LEV 19:17 You must not hate your brother in your heart. You must surely reprove your fellow citizen so that you do not incur sin on account of him.
LEV 19:18 You must not take vengeance or bear a grudge against the children of your people, but you must love your neighbor as yourself. I am the Lord.
LEV 19:19 You must keep my statutes. You must not allow two different kinds of your animals to breed, you must not sow your field with two different kinds of seed, and you must not wear a garment made of two different kinds of fabric.
LEV 19:20 “‘When a man has sexual intercourse with a woman, although she is a slave woman designated for another man and she has not yet been ransomed, or freedom has not been granted to her, there will be an obligation to pay compensation. They must not be put to death, because she was not free.
LEV 19:21 He must bring his guilt offering to the Lord at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, a guilt offering ram,
LEV 19:22 and the priest is to make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering before the Lord for his sin that he has committed, and he will be forgiven of his sin that he has committed.
LEV 19:23 “‘When you enter the land and plant any fruit tree, you must consider its fruit to be forbidden. Three years it will be forbidden to you; it must not be eaten.
LEV 19:24 In the fourth year all its fruit will be holy, praise offerings to the Lord.
LEV 19:25 Then in the fifth year you may eat its fruit to add its produce to your harvest. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 19:26 “‘You must not eat anything with the blood still in it. You must not practice either divination or soothsaying.
LEV 19:27 You must not round off the corners of the hair on your head or ruin the corners of your beard.
LEV 19:28 You must not slash your body for a dead person or incise a tattoo on yourself. I am the Lord.
LEV 19:29 Do not profane your daughter by making her a prostitute, so that the land does not practice prostitution and become full of lewdness.
LEV 19:30 “‘You must keep my Sabbaths and fear my sanctuary. I am the Lord.
LEV 19:31 Do not turn to the spirits of the dead and do not seek familiar spirits to become unclean by them. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 19:32 You must stand up in the presence of the aged, honor the presence of an elder, and fear your God. I am the Lord.
LEV 19:33 When a foreigner resides with you in your land, you must not oppress him.
LEV 19:34 The foreigner who resides with you must be to you like a native citizen among you; so you must love him as yourself, because you were foreigners in the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 19:35 You must not do injustice in the regulation of measures, whether of length, weight, or volume.
LEV 19:36 You must have honest balances, honest weights, an honest ephah, and an honest hin. I am the Lord your God who brought you out from the land of Egypt.
LEV 19:37 You must be sure to obey all my statutes and regulations. I am the Lord.’”
LEV 20:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 20:2 “You are to say to the Israelites, ‘Any man from the Israelites or from the foreigners who reside in Israel who gives any of his children to Molech must be put to death; the people of the land must pelt him with stones.
LEV 20:3 I myself will set my face against that man and cut him off from the midst of his people, because he has given some of his children to Molech and thereby defiled my sanctuary and profaned my holy name.
LEV 20:4 If, however, the people of the land shut their eyes to that man when he gives some of his children to Molech so that they do not put him to death,
LEV 20:5 I myself will set my face against that man and his clan. I will cut off from the midst of their people both him and all who follow after him in spiritual prostitution, to commit prostitution by worshiping Molech.
LEV 20:6 “‘The person who turns to the spirits of the dead and familiar spirits to commit prostitution by going after them, I will set my face against that person and cut him off from the midst of his people.
LEV 20:7 “‘You must sanctify yourselves and be holy, because I am the Lord your God.
LEV 20:8 You must be sure to obey my statutes. I am the Lord who sanctifies you.
LEV 20:9 “‘If anyone curses his father and mother he must be put to death. He has cursed his father and mother; his blood guilt is on himself.
LEV 20:10 If a man commits adultery with his neighbor’s wife, both the adulterer and the adulteress must be put to death.
LEV 20:11 If a man has sexual intercourse with his father’s wife, he has exposed his father’s nakedness. Both of them must be put to death; their blood guilt is on themselves.
LEV 20:12 If a man has sexual intercourse with his daughter-in-law, both of them must be put to death. They have committed perversion; their blood guilt is on themselves.
LEV 20:13 If a man has sexual intercourse with a male as one has sexual intercourse with a woman, the two of them have committed an abomination. They must be put to death; their blood guilt is on themselves.
LEV 20:14 If a man has sexual intercourse with both a woman and her mother, it is lewdness. Both he and they must be burned to death, so there is no lewdness in your midst.
LEV 20:15 If a man has sexual intercourse with any animal, he must be put to death, and you must kill the animal.
LEV 20:16 If a woman approaches any animal to have sexual intercourse with it, you must kill the woman, and the animal must be put to death; their blood guilt is on themselves.
LEV 20:17 “‘If a man has sexual intercourse with his sister, whether the daughter of his father or his mother, so that he sees her nakedness and she sees his nakedness, it is a disgrace. They must be cut off in the sight of the children of their people. He has exposed his sister’s nakedness; he will bear his punishment for iniquity.
LEV 20:18 If a man has sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman and uncovers her nakedness, he has laid bare her fountain of blood and she has exposed the fountain of her blood, so both of them must be cut off from the midst of their people.
LEV 20:19 You must not expose the nakedness of your mother’s sister and your father’s sister, for such a person has laid bare his own close relative. They must bear their punishment for iniquity.
LEV 20:20 If a man has sexual intercourse with his aunt, he has exposed his uncle’s nakedness; they must bear responsibility for their sin, they will die childless.
LEV 20:21 If a man has sexual intercourse with his brother’s wife, it is indecency. He has exposed his brother’s nakedness; they will be childless.
LEV 20:22 “‘You must be sure to obey all my statutes and regulations, so that the land to which I am about to bring you to take up residence there does not vomit you out.
LEV 20:23 You must not walk in the statutes of the nation which I am about to drive out before you, because they have done all these things and I am filled with disgust against them.
LEV 20:24 So I have said to you: You yourselves will possess their land and I myself will give it to you for a possession, a land flowing with milk and honey. I am the Lord your God who has set you apart from the other peoples.
LEV 20:25 Therefore you must distinguish between the clean animal and the unclean, and between the unclean bird and the clean, and you must not make yourselves detestable by means of an animal or bird or anything that creeps on the ground – creatures I have distinguished for you as unclean.
LEV 20:26 You must be holy to me because I, the Lord, am holy, and I have set you apart from the other peoples to be mine.
LEV 20:27 “‘A man or woman who has in them a spirit of the dead or a familiar spirit must be put to death. They must pelt them with stones; their blood guilt is on themselves.’”
LEV 21:1 The Lord said to Moses: “Say to the priests, the sons of Aaron – say to them, ‘For a dead person no priest is to defile himself among his people,
LEV 21:2 except for his close relative who is near to him: his mother, his father, his son, his daughter, his brother,
LEV 21:3 and his virgin sister who is near to him, who has no husband; he may defile himself for her.
LEV 21:4 He must not defile himself as a husband among his people so as to profane himself.
LEV 21:5 Priests must not have a bald spot shaved on their head, they must not shave the corner of their beard, and they must not cut slashes in their body.
LEV 21:6 “‘They must be holy to their God, and they must not profane the name of their God, because they are the ones who present the Lord’s gifts, the food of their God. Therefore they must be holy.
LEV 21:7 They must not take a wife defiled by prostitution, nor are they to take a wife divorced from her husband, for the priest is holy to his God.
LEV 21:8 You must sanctify him because he presents the food of your God. He must be holy to you because I, the Lord who sanctifies you all, am holy.
LEV 21:9 If a daughter of a priest profanes herself by engaging in prostitution, she is profaning her father. She must be burned to death.
LEV 21:10 “‘The high priest – who is greater than his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil is poured, who has been ordained to wear the priestly garments – must neither dishevel the hair of his head nor tear his garments.
LEV 21:11 He must not go where there is any dead person; he must not defile himself even for his father and his mother.
LEV 21:12 He must not go out from the sanctuary and must not profane the sanctuary of his God, because the dedication of the anointing oil of his God is on him. I am the Lord.
LEV 21:13 He must take a wife who is a virgin.
LEV 21:14 He must not marry a widow, a divorced woman, or one profaned by prostitution; he may only take a virgin from his people as a wife.
LEV 21:15 He must not profane his children among his people, for I am the Lord who sanctifies him.’”
LEV 21:16 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 21:17 “Tell Aaron, ‘No man from your descendants throughout their generations who has a physical flaw is to approach to present the food of his God.
LEV 21:18 Certainly no man who has a physical flaw is to approach: a blind man, or one who is lame, or one with a slit nose, or a limb too long,
LEV 21:19 or a man who has had a broken leg or arm,
LEV 21:20 or a hunchback, or a dwarf, or one with a spot in his eye, or a festering eruption, or a feverish rash, or a crushed testicle.
LEV 21:21 No man from the descendants of Aaron the priest who has a physical flaw may step forward to present the Lord’s gifts; he has a physical flaw, so he must not step forward to present the food of his God.
LEV 21:22 He may eat both the most holy and the holy food of his God,
LEV 21:23 but he must not go into the veil-canopy or step forward to the altar because he has a physical flaw. Thus he must not profane my holy places, for I am the Lord who sanctifies them.’”
LEV 21:24 So Moses spoke these things to Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites.
LEV 22:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 22:2 “Tell Aaron and his sons that they must deal respectfully with the holy offerings of the Israelites, which they consecrate to me, so that they do not profane my holy name. I am the Lord.
LEV 22:3 Say to them, ‘Throughout your generations, if any man from all your descendants approaches the holy offerings which the Israelites consecrate to the Lord while he is impure, that person must be cut off from before me. I am the Lord.
LEV 22:4 No man from the descendants of Aaron who is diseased or has a discharge may eat the holy offerings until he becomes clean. The one who touches anything made unclean by contact with a dead person, or a man who has a seminal emission,
LEV 22:5 or a man who touches a swarming thing by which he becomes unclean, or touches a person by which he becomes unclean, whatever that person’s impurity –
LEV 22:6 the person who touches any of these will be unclean until evening and must not eat from the holy offerings unless he has bathed his body in water.
LEV 22:7 When the sun goes down he will be clean, and afterward he may eat from the holy offerings, because they are his food.
LEV 22:8 He must not eat an animal that has died of natural causes or an animal torn by beasts and thus become unclean by it. I am the Lord.
LEV 22:9 They must keep my charge so that they do not incur sin on account of it and therefore die because they profane it. I am the Lord who sanctifies them.
LEV 22:10 “‘No lay person may eat anything holy. Neither a priest’s lodger nor a hired laborer may eat anything holy,
LEV 22:11 but if a priest buys a person with his own money, that person may eat the holy offerings, and those born in the priest’s own house may eat his food.
LEV 22:12 If a priest’s daughter marries a lay person, she may not eat the holy contribution offerings,
LEV 22:13 but if a priest’s daughter is a widow or divorced, and she has no children so that she returns to live in her father’s house as in her youth, she may eat from her father’s food, but no lay person may eat it.
LEV 22:14 “‘If a man eats a holy offering by mistake, he must add one fifth to it and give the holy offering to the priest.
LEV 22:15 They must not profane the holy offerings which the Israelites contribute to the Lord,
LEV 22:16 and so cause them to incur a penalty for guilt when they eat their holy offerings, for I am the Lord who sanctifies them.’”
LEV 22:17 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 22:18 “Speak to Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites and tell them, ‘When any man from the house of Israel or from the foreigners in Israel presents his offering for any of the votive or freewill offerings which they present to the Lord as a burnt offering,
LEV 22:19 if it is to be acceptable for your benefit it must be a flawless male from the cattle, sheep, or goats.
LEV 22:20 You must not present anything that has a flaw, because it will not be acceptable for your benefit.
LEV 22:21 If a man presents a peace offering sacrifice to the Lord for a special votive offering or for a freewill offering from the herd or the flock, it must be flawless to be acceptable; it must have no flaw.
LEV 22:22 “‘You must not present to the Lord something blind, or with a broken bone, or mutilated, or with a running sore, or with a festering eruption, or with a feverish rash. You must not give any of these as a gift on the altar to the Lord.
LEV 22:23 As for an ox or a sheep with a limb too long or stunted, you may present it as a freewill offering, but it will not be acceptable for a votive offering.
LEV 22:24 You must not present to the Lord something with testicles that are bruised, crushed, torn, or cut off; you must not do this in your land.
LEV 22:25 Even from a foreigner you must not present the food of your God from such animals as these, for they are ruined and flawed; they will not be acceptable for your benefit.’”
LEV 22:26 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 22:27 “When an ox, lamb, or goat is born, it must be under the care of its mother seven days, but from the eighth day onward it will be acceptable as an offering gift to the Lord.
LEV 22:28 You must not slaughter an ox or a sheep and its young on the same day.
LEV 22:29 When you sacrifice a thanksgiving offering to the Lord, you must sacrifice it so that it is acceptable for your benefit.
LEV 22:30 On that very day it must be eaten; you must not leave any part of it over until morning. I am the Lord.
LEV 22:31 “You must be sure to do my commandments. I am the Lord.
LEV 22:32 You must not profane my holy name, and I will be sanctified in the midst of the Israelites. I am the Lord who sanctifies you,
LEV 22:33 the one who brought you out from the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the Lord.”
LEV 23:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 23:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘These are the Lord’s appointed times which you must proclaim as holy assemblies – my appointed times:
LEV 23:3 “‘Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day there must be a Sabbath of complete rest, a holy assembly. You must not do any work; it is a Sabbath to the Lord in all the places where you live.
LEV 23:4 “‘These are the Lord’s appointed times, holy assemblies, which you must proclaim at their appointed time.
LEV 23:5 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at twilight, is a Passover offering to the Lord.
LEV 23:6 Then on the fifteenth day of the same month will be the festival of unleavened bread to the Lord; seven days you must eat unleavened bread.
LEV 23:7 On the first day there will be a holy assembly for you; you must not do any regular work.
LEV 23:8 You must present a gift to the Lord for seven days, and the seventh day is a holy assembly; you must not do any regular work.’”
LEV 23:9 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 23:10 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land that I am about to give to you and you gather in its harvest, then you must bring the sheaf of the first portion of your harvest to the priest,
LEV 23:11 and he must wave the sheaf before the Lord to be accepted for your benefit – on the day after the Sabbath the priest is to wave it.
LEV 23:12 On the day you wave the sheaf you must also offer a flawless yearling lamb for a burnt offering to the Lord,
LEV 23:13 along with its grain offering, two tenths of an ephah of choice wheat flour mixed with olive oil, as a gift to the Lord, a soothing aroma, and its drink offering, one fourth of a hin of wine.
LEV 23:14 You must not eat bread, roasted grain, or fresh grain until this very day, until you bring the offering of your God. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all the places where you live.
LEV 23:15 “‘You must count for yourselves seven weeks from the day after the Sabbath, from the day you bring the wave offering sheaf; they must be complete weeks.
LEV 23:16 You must count fifty days – until the day after the seventh Sabbath – and then you must present a new grain offering to the Lord.
LEV 23:17 From the places where you live you must bring two loaves of bread for a wave offering; they must be made from two tenths of an ephah of fine wheat flour, baked with yeast, as first fruits to the Lord.
LEV 23:18 Along with the loaves of bread, you must also present seven flawless yearling lambs, one young bull, and two rams. They are to be a burnt offering to the Lord along with their grain offering and drink offerings, a gift of a soothing aroma to the Lord.
LEV 23:19 You must also offer one male goat for a sin offering and two yearling lambs for a peace offering sacrifice,
LEV 23:20 and the priest is to wave them – the two lambs – along with the bread of the first fruits, as a wave offering before the Lord; they will be holy to the Lord for the priest.
LEV 23:21 “‘On this very day you must proclaim an assembly; it is to be a holy assembly for you. You must not do any regular work. This is a perpetual statute in all the places where you live throughout your generations.
LEV 23:22 When you gather in the harvest of your land, you must not completely harvest the corner of your field, and you must not gather up the gleanings of your harvest. You must leave them for the poor and the foreigner. I am the Lord your God.’”
LEV 23:23 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 23:24 “Tell the Israelites, ‘In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you must have a complete rest, a memorial announced by loud horn blasts, a holy assembly.
LEV 23:25 You must not do any regular work, but you must present a gift to the Lord.’”
LEV 23:26 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 23:27 “The tenth day of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. It is to be a holy assembly for you, and you must humble yourselves and present a gift to the Lord.
LEV 23:28 You must not do any work on this particular day, because it is a day of atonement to make atonement for yourselves before the Lord your God.
LEV 23:29 Indeed, any person who does not behave with humility on this particular day will be cut off from his people.
LEV 23:30 As for any person who does any work on this particular day, I will exterminate that person from the midst of his people!
LEV 23:31 You must not do any work. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all the places where you live.
LEV 23:32 It is a Sabbath of complete rest for you, and you must humble yourselves on the ninth day of the month in the evening, from evening until evening you must observe your Sabbath.”
LEV 23:33 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 23:34 “Tell the Israelites, ‘On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the Festival of Temporary Shelters for seven days to the Lord.
LEV 23:35 On the first day is a holy assembly; you must do no regular work.
LEV 23:36 For seven days you must present a gift to the Lord. On the eighth day there is to be a holy assembly for you, and you must present a gift to the Lord. It is a solemn assembly day; you must not do any regular work.
LEV 23:37 “‘These are the appointed times of the Lord that you must proclaim as holy assemblies to present a gift to the Lord – burnt offering, grain offering, sacrifice, and drink offerings, each day according to its regulation,
LEV 23:38 besides the Sabbaths of the Lord and all your gifts, votive offerings, and freewill offerings which you must give to the Lord.
LEV 23:39 “‘On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you gather in the produce of the land, you must celebrate a pilgrim festival of the Lord for seven days. On the first day is a complete rest and on the eighth day is complete rest.
LEV 23:40 On the first day you must take for yourselves branches from majestic trees – palm branches, branches of leafy trees, and willows of the brook – and you must rejoice before the Lord your God for seven days.
LEV 23:41 You must celebrate it as a pilgrim festival to the Lord for seven days in the year. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations; you must celebrate it in the seventh month.
LEV 23:42 You must live in temporary shelters for seven days; every native citizen in Israel must live in temporary shelters,
LEV 23:43 so that your future generations may know that I made the Israelites live in temporary shelters when I brought them out from the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God.’”
LEV 23:44 So Moses spoke to the Israelites about the appointed times of the Lord.
LEV 24:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 24:2 “Command the Israelites to bring to you pure oil of beaten olives for the light, to make a lamp burn continually.
LEV 24:3 Outside the veil-canopy of the congregation in the Meeting Tent Aaron must arrange it from evening until morning before the Lord continually. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations.
LEV 24:4 On the ceremonially pure lampstand he must arrange the lamps before the Lord continually.
LEV 24:5 “You must take choice wheat flour and bake twelve loaves; there must be two tenths of an ephah of flour in each loaf,
LEV 24:6 and you must set them in two rows, six in a row, on the ceremonially pure table before the Lord.
LEV 24:7 You must put pure frankincense on each row, and it will become a memorial portion for the bread, a gift to the Lord.
LEV 24:8 Each Sabbath day Aaron must arrange it before the Lord continually; this portion is from the Israelites as a perpetual covenant.
LEV 24:9 It will belong to Aaron and his sons, and they must eat it in a holy place because it is most holy to him, a perpetual allotted portion from the gifts of the Lord.”
LEV 24:10 Now an Israelite woman’s son whose father was an Egyptian went out among the Israelites, and the Israelite woman’s son and an Israelite man had a fight in the camp.
LEV 24:11 The Israelite woman’s son misused the Name and cursed, so they brought him to Moses. (Now his mother’s name was Shelomith daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.)
LEV 24:12 So they placed him in custody until they were able to make a clear legal decision for themselves based on words from the mouth of the Lord.
LEV 24:13 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 24:14 “Bring the one who cursed outside the camp, and all who heard him are to lay their hands on his head, and the whole congregation is to stone him to death.
LEV 24:15 Moreover, you are to tell the Israelites, ‘If any man curses his God he will bear responsibility for his sin,
LEV 24:16 and one who misuses the name of the Lord must surely be put to death. The whole congregation must surely stone him, whether he is a foreigner or a native citizen; when he misuses the Name he must be put to death.
LEV 24:17 “‘If a man beats any person to death, he must be put to death.
LEV 24:18 One who beats an animal to death must make restitution for it, life for life.
LEV 24:19 If a man inflicts an injury on his fellow citizen, just as he has done it must be done to him –
LEV 24:20 fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth – just as he inflicts an injury on another person that same injury must be inflicted on him.
LEV 24:21 One who beats an animal to death must make restitution for it, but one who beats a person to death must be put to death.
LEV 24:22 There will be one regulation for you, whether a foreigner or a native citizen, for I am the Lord your God.’”
LEV 24:23 Then Moses spoke to the Israelites and they brought the one who cursed outside the camp and stoned him with stones. So the Israelites did just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
LEV 25:1 The Lord spoke to Moses at Mount Sinai:
LEV 25:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land that I am giving you, the land must observe a Sabbath to the Lord.
LEV 25:3 Six years you may sow your field, and six years you may prune your vineyard and gather the produce,
LEV 25:4 but in the seventh year the land must have a Sabbath of complete rest – a Sabbath to the Lord. You must not sow your field or prune your vineyard.
LEV 25:5 You must not gather in the aftergrowth of your harvest and you must not pick the grapes of your unpruned vines; the land must have a year of complete rest.
LEV 25:6 You may have the Sabbath produce of the land to eat – you, your male servant, your female servant, your hired worker, the resident foreigner who stays with you,
LEV 25:7 your cattle, and the wild animals that are in your land – all its produce will be for you to eat.
LEV 25:8 “‘You must count off seven weeks of years, seven times seven years, and the days of the seven weeks of years will amount to forty-nine years.
LEV 25:9 You must sound loud horn blasts – in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, on the Day of Atonement – you must sound the horn in your entire land.
LEV 25:10 So you must consecrate the fiftieth year, and you must proclaim a release in the land for all its inhabitants. That year will be your jubilee; each one of you must return to his property and each one of you must return to his clan.
LEV 25:11 That fiftieth year will be your jubilee; you must not sow the land, harvest its aftergrowth, or pick the grapes of its unpruned vines.
LEV 25:12 Because that year is a jubilee, it will be holy to you – you may eat its produce from the field.
LEV 25:13 “‘In this year of jubilee you must each return to your property.
LEV 25:14 If you make a sale to your fellow citizen or buy from your fellow citizen, no one is to wrong his brother.
LEV 25:15 You may buy it from your fellow citizen according to the number of years since the last jubilee; he may sell it to you according to the years of produce that are left.
LEV 25:16 The more years there are, the more you may make its purchase price, and the fewer years there are, the less you must make its purchase price, because he is only selling to you a number of years of produce.
LEV 25:17 No one is to oppress his fellow citizen, but you must fear your God, because I am the Lord your God.
LEV 25:18 You must obey my statutes and my regulations; you must be sure to keep them so that you may live securely in the land.
LEV 25:19 “‘The land will give its fruit and you may eat until you are satisfied, and you may live securely in the land.
LEV 25:20 If you say, ‘What will we eat in the seventh year if we do not sow and gather our produce?’
LEV 25:21 I will command my blessing for you in the sixth year so that it may yield the produce for three years,
LEV 25:22 and you may sow the eighth year and eat from that sixth year’s produce – old produce. Until you bring in the ninth year’s produce, you may eat old produce.
LEV 25:23 The land must not be sold without reclaim because the land belongs to me, for you are foreigners and residents with me.
LEV 25:24 In all your landed property you must provide for the right of redemption of the land.
LEV 25:25 “‘If your brother becomes impoverished and sells some of his property, his near redeemer is to come to you and redeem what his brother sold.
LEV 25:26 If a man has no redeemer, but he prospers and gains enough for its redemption,
LEV 25:27 he is to calculate the value of the years it was sold, refund the balance to the man to whom he had sold it, and return to his property.
LEV 25:28 If he has not prospered enough to refund a balance to him, then what he sold will belong to the one who bought it until the jubilee year, but it must revert in the jubilee and the original owner may return to his property.
LEV 25:29 “‘If a man sells a residential house in a walled city, its right of redemption must extend until one full year from its sale; its right of redemption must extend to a full calendar year.
LEV 25:30 If it is not redeemed before the full calendar year is ended, the house in the walled city will belong without reclaim to the one who bought it throughout his generations; it will not revert in the jubilee.
LEV 25:31 The houses of villages, however, which have no wall surrounding them must be considered as the field of the land; they will have the right of redemption and must revert in the jubilee.
LEV 25:32 As for the cities of the Levites, the houses in the cities which they possess, the Levites must have a perpetual right of redemption.
LEV 25:33 Whatever someone among the Levites might redeem – the sale of a house which is his property in a city – must revert in the jubilee, because the houses of the cities of the Levites are their property in the midst of the Israelites.
LEV 25:34 Moreover, the open field areas of their cities must not be sold, because that is their perpetual possession.
LEV 25:35 “‘If your brother becomes impoverished and is indebted to you, you must support him; he must live with you like a foreign resident.
LEV 25:36 Do not take interest or profit from him, but you must fear your God and your brother must live with you.
LEV 25:37 You must not lend him your money at interest and you must not sell him food for profit.
LEV 25:38 I am the Lord your God who brought you out from the land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan – to be your God.
LEV 25:39 “‘If your brother becomes impoverished with regard to you so that he sells himself to you, you must not subject him to slave service.
LEV 25:40 He must be with you as a hired worker, as a resident foreigner; he must serve with you until the year of jubilee,
LEV 25:41 but then he may go free, he and his children with him, and may return to his family and to the property of his ancestors.
LEV 25:42 Since they are my servants whom I brought out from the land of Egypt, they must not be sold in a slave sale.
LEV 25:43 You must not rule over him harshly, but you must fear your God.
LEV 25:44 “‘As for your male and female slaves who may belong to you – you may buy male and female slaves from the nations all around you.
LEV 25:45 Also you may buy slaves from the children of the foreigners who reside with you, and from their families that are with you, whom they have fathered in your land, they may become your property.
LEV 25:46 You may give them as inheritance to your children after you to possess as property. You may enslave them perpetually. However, as for your brothers the Israelites, no man may rule over his brother harshly.
LEV 25:47 “‘If a resident foreigner who is with you prospers and your brother becomes impoverished with regard to him so that he sells himself to a resident foreigner who is with you or to a member of a foreigner’s family,
LEV 25:48 after he has sold himself he retains a right of redemption. One of his brothers may redeem him,
LEV 25:49 or his uncle or his cousin may redeem him, or anyone of the rest of his blood relatives – his family – may redeem him, or if he prospers he may redeem himself.
LEV 25:50 He must calculate with the one who bought him the number of years from the year he sold himself to him until the jubilee year, and the cost of his sale must correspond to the number of years, according to the rate of wages a hired worker would have earned while with him.
LEV 25:51 If there are still many years, in keeping with them he must refund most of the cost of his purchase for his redemption,
LEV 25:52 but if only a few years remain until the jubilee, he must calculate for himself in keeping with the remaining years and refund it for his redemption.
LEV 25:53 He must be with the one who bought him like a yearly hired worker. The one who bought him must not rule over him harshly in your sight.
LEV 25:54 If, however, he is not redeemed in these ways, he must go free in the jubilee year, he and his children with him,
LEV 25:55 because the Israelites are my own servants; they are my servants whom I brought out from the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God.
LEV 26:1 “‘You must not make for yourselves idols, so you must not set up for yourselves a carved image or a pillar, and you must not place a sculpted stone in your land to bow down before it, for I am the Lord your God.
LEV 26:2 You must keep my Sabbaths and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.
LEV 26:3 “‘If you walk in my statutes and are sure to obey my commandments,
LEV 26:4 I will give you your rains in their time so that the land will give its yield and the trees of the field will produce their fruit.
LEV 26:5 Threshing season will extend for you until the season for harvesting grapes, and the season for harvesting grapes will extend until sowing season, so you will eat your bread until you are satisfied, and you will live securely in your land.
LEV 26:6 I will grant peace in the land so that you will lie down to sleep without anyone terrifying you. I will remove harmful animals from the land, and no sword of war will pass through your land.
LEV 26:7 You will pursue your enemies and they will fall before you by the sword.
LEV 26:8 Five of you will pursue a hundred, and a hundred of you will pursue ten thousand, and your enemies will fall before you by the sword.
LEV 26:9 I will turn to you, make you fruitful, multiply you, and maintain my covenant with you.
LEV 26:10 You will still be eating stored produce from the previous year and will have to clean out what is stored from the previous year to make room for new.
LEV 26:11 “‘I will put my tabernacle in your midst and I will not abhor you.
LEV 26:12 I will walk among you, and I will be your God and you will be my people.
LEV 26:13 I am the Lord your God who brought you out from the land of Egypt, from being their slaves, and I broke the bars of your yoke and caused you to walk upright.
LEV 26:14 “‘If, however, you do not obey me and keep all these commandments –
LEV 26:15 if you reject my statutes and abhor my regulations so that you do not keep all my commandments and you break my covenant –
LEV 26:16 I for my part will do this to you: I will inflict horror on you, consumption and fever, which diminish eyesight and drain away the vitality of life. You will sow your seed in vain because your enemies will eat it.
LEV 26:17 I will set my face against you. You will be struck down before your enemies, those who hate you will rule over you, and you will flee when there is no one pursuing you.
LEV 26:18 “‘If, in spite of all these things, you do not obey me, I will discipline you seven times more on account of your sins.
LEV 26:19 I will break your strong pride and make your sky like iron and your land like bronze.
LEV 26:20 Your strength will be used up in vain, your land will not give its yield, and the trees of the land will not produce their fruit.
LEV 26:21 “‘If you walk in hostility against me and are not willing to obey me, I will increase your affliction seven times according to your sins.
LEV 26:22 I will send the wild animals against you and they will bereave you of your children, annihilate your cattle, and diminish your population so that your roads will become deserted.
LEV 26:23 “‘If in spite of these things you do not allow yourselves to be disciplined and you walk in hostility against me,
LEV 26:24 I myself will also walk in hostility against you and strike you seven times on account of your sins.
LEV 26:25 I will bring on you an avenging sword, a covenant vengeance. Although you will gather together into your cities, I will send pestilence among you and you will be given into enemy hands.
LEV 26:26 When I break off your supply of bread, ten women will bake your bread in one oven; they will ration your bread by weight, and you will eat and not be satisfied.
LEV 26:27 “‘If in spite of this you do not obey me but walk in hostility against me,
LEV 26:28 I will walk in hostile rage against you and I myself will also discipline you seven times on account of your sins.
LEV 26:29 You will eat the flesh of your sons and the flesh of your daughters.
LEV 26:30 I will destroy your high places and cut down your incense altars, and I will stack your dead bodies on top of the lifeless bodies of your idols. I will abhor you.
LEV 26:31 I will lay your cities waste and make your sanctuaries desolate, and I will refuse to smell your soothing aromas.
LEV 26:32 I myself will make the land desolate and your enemies who live in it will be appalled.
LEV 26:33 I will scatter you among the nations and unsheathe the sword after you, so your land will become desolate and your cities will become a waste.
LEV 26:34 “‘Then the land will make up for its Sabbaths all the days it lies desolate while you are in the land of your enemies; then the land will rest and make up its Sabbaths.
LEV 26:35 All the days of the desolation it will have the rest it did not have on your Sabbaths when you lived on it.
LEV 26:36 “‘As for the ones who remain among you, I will bring despair into their hearts in the lands of their enemies. The sound of a blowing leaf will pursue them, and they will flee as one who flees the sword and fall down even though there is no pursuer.
LEV 26:37 They will stumble over each other as those who flee before a sword, though there is no pursuer, and there will be no one to take a stand for you before your enemies.
LEV 26:38 You will perish among the nations; the land of your enemies will consume you.
LEV 26:39 “‘As for the ones who remain among you, they will rot away because of their iniquity in the lands of your enemies, and they will also rot away because of their ancestors’ iniquities which are with them.
LEV 26:40 However, when they confess their iniquity and their ancestors’ iniquity which they committed by trespassing against me, by which they also walked in hostility against me
LEV 26:41 (and I myself will walk in hostility against them and bring them into the land of their enemies), and then their uncircumcised hearts become humbled and they make up for their iniquity,
LEV 26:42 I will remember my covenant with Jacob and also my covenant with Isaac and also my covenant with Abraham, and I will remember the land.
LEV 26:43 The land will be abandoned by them in order that it may make up for its Sabbaths while it is made desolate without them, and they will make up for their iniquity because they have rejected my regulations and have abhorred my statutes.
LEV 26:44 In spite of this, however, when they are in the land of their enemies I will not reject them and abhor them to make a complete end of them, to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God.
LEV 26:45 I will remember for them the covenant with their ancestors whom I brought out from the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations to be their God. I am the Lord.’”
LEV 26:46 These are the statutes, regulations, and instructions which the Lord established between himself and the Israelites at Mount Sinai through Moses.
LEV 27:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
LEV 27:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When a man makes a special votive offering based on the conversion value of persons to the Lord,
LEV 27:3 the conversion value of the male from twenty years old up to sixty years old is fifty shekels by the standard of the sanctuary shekel.
LEV 27:4 If the person is a female, the conversion value is thirty shekels.
LEV 27:5 If the person is from five years old up to twenty years old, the conversion value of the male is twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
LEV 27:6 If the person is one month old up to five years old, the conversion value of the male is five shekels of silver, and for the female the conversion value is three shekels of silver.
LEV 27:7 If the person is from sixty years old and older, if he is a male the conversion value is fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
LEV 27:8 If he is too poor to pay the conversion value, he must stand the person before the priest and the priest will establish his conversion value; according to what the man who made the vow can afford, the priest will establish his conversion value.
LEV 27:9 “‘If what is vowed is a kind of animal from which an offering may be presented to the Lord, anything which he gives to the Lord from this kind of animal will be holy.
LEV 27:10 He must not replace or exchange it, good for bad or bad for good, and if he does indeed exchange one animal for another animal, then both the original animal and its substitute will be holy.
LEV 27:11 If what is vowed is an unclean animal from which an offering must not be presented to the Lord, then he must stand the animal before the priest,
LEV 27:12 and the priest will establish its conversion value, whether good or bad. According to the assessed conversion value of the priest, thus it will be.
LEV 27:13 If, however, the person who made the vow redeems the animal, he must add one fifth to its conversion value.
LEV 27:14 “‘If a man consecrates his house as holy to the Lord, the priest will establish its conversion value, whether good or bad. Just as the priest establishes its conversion value, thus it will stand.
LEV 27:15 If the one who consecrates it redeems his house, he must add to it one fifth of its conversion value in silver, and it will belong to him.
LEV 27:16 “‘If a man consecrates to the Lord some of his own landed property, the conversion value must be calculated in accordance with the amount of seed needed to sow it, a homer of barley seed being priced at fifty shekels of silver.
LEV 27:17 If he consecrates his field in the jubilee year, the conversion value will stand,
LEV 27:18 but if he consecrates his field after the jubilee, the priest will calculate the price for him according to the years that are left until the next jubilee year, and it will be deducted from the conversion value.
LEV 27:19 If, however, the one who consecrated the field redeems it, he must add to it one fifth of the conversion price and it will belong to him.
LEV 27:20 If he does not redeem the field, but sells the field to someone else, he may never redeem it.
LEV 27:21 When it reverts in the jubilee, the field will be holy to the Lord like a permanently dedicated field; it will become the priest’s property.
LEV 27:22 “‘If he consecrates to the Lord a field he has purchased, which is not part of his own landed property,
LEV 27:23 the priest will calculate for him the amount of its conversion value until the jubilee year, and he must pay the conversion value on that jubilee day as something that is holy to the Lord.
LEV 27:24 In the jubilee year the field will return to the one from whom he bought it, the one to whom it belongs as landed property.
LEV 27:25 Every conversion value must be calculated by the standard of the sanctuary shekel; twenty gerahs to the shekel.
LEV 27:26 “‘Surely no man may consecrate a firstborn that already belongs to the Lord as a firstborn among the animals; whether it is an ox or a sheep, it belongs to the Lord.
LEV 27:27 If, however, it is among the unclean animals, he may ransom it according to its conversion value and must add one fifth to it, but if it is not redeemed it must be sold according to its conversion value.
LEV 27:28 “‘Surely anything which a man permanently dedicates to the Lord from all that belongs to him, whether from people, animals, or his landed property, must be neither sold nor redeemed; anything permanently dedicated is most holy to the Lord.
LEV 27:29 Any human being who is permanently dedicated must not be ransomed; such a person must be put to death.
LEV 27:30 “‘Any tithe of the land, from the grain of the land or from the fruit of the trees, belongs to the Lord; it is holy to the Lord.
LEV 27:31 If a man redeems part of his tithe, however, he must add one fifth to it.
LEV 27:32 All the tithe of herd or flock, everything which passes under the rod, the tenth one will be holy to the Lord.
LEV 27:33 The owner must not examine the animals to distinguish between good and bad, and he must not exchange it. If, however, he does exchange it, both the original animal and its substitute will be holy. It must not be redeemed.’”
LEV 27:34 These are the commandments which the Lord commanded Moses to tell the Israelites at Mount Sinai.
NUM 1:1 Now the Lord spoke to Moses in the tent of meeting in the wilderness of Sinai on the first day of the second month of the second year after the Israelites departed from the land of Egypt. He said:
NUM 1:2 “Take a census of the entire Israelite community by their clans and families, counting the name of every individual male.
NUM 1:3 You and Aaron are to number all in Israel who can serve in the army, those who are twenty years old or older, by their divisions.
NUM 1:4 And to help you there is to be a man from each tribe, each man the head of his family.
NUM 1:5 Now these are the names of the men who are to help you: from Reuben, Elizur son of Shedeur;
NUM 1:6 from Simeon, Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai;
NUM 1:7 from Judah, Nahshon son of Amminadab;
NUM 1:8 from Issachar, Nethanel son of Zuar;
NUM 1:9 from Zebulun, Eliab son of Helon;
NUM 1:10 from the sons of Joseph: from Ephraim, Elishama son of Ammihud; from Manasseh, Gamaliel son of Pedahzur;
NUM 1:11 from Benjamin, Abidan son of Gideoni;
NUM 1:12 from Dan, Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai;
NUM 1:13 from Asher, Pagiel son of Ocran;
NUM 1:14 from Gad, Eliasaph son of Deuel;
NUM 1:15 from Naphtali, Ahira son of Enan.”
NUM 1:16 These were the ones chosen from the community, leaders of their ancestral tribes. They were the heads of the thousands of Israel.
NUM 1:17 So Moses and Aaron took these men who had been mentioned specifically by name,
NUM 1:18 and they assembled the entire community together on the first day of the second month. Then the people recorded their ancestry by their clans and families, and the men who were twenty years old or older were listed by name individually,
NUM 1:19 just as the Lord had commanded Moses. And so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
NUM 1:20 And they were as follows: The descendants of Reuben, the firstborn son of Israel: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name individually.
NUM 1:21 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Reuben were 46,500.
NUM 1:22 From the descendants of Simeon: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males numbered of them twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name individually.
NUM 1:23 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Simeon were 59,300.
NUM 1:24 From the descendants of Gad: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:25 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Gad were 45,650.
NUM 1:26 From the descendants of Judah: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:27 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Judah were 74,600.
NUM 1:28 From the descendants of Issachar: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:29 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Issachar were 54,400.
NUM 1:30 From the descendants of Zebulun: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:31 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Zebulun were 57,400.
NUM 1:32 From the sons of Joseph: From the descendants of Ephraim: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:33 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Ephraim were 40,500.
NUM 1:34 From the descendants of Manasseh: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:35 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Manasseh were 32,200.
NUM 1:36 From the descendants of Benjamin: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:37 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Benjamin were 35,400.
NUM 1:38 From the descendants of Dan: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:39 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Dan were 62,700.
NUM 1:40 From the descendants of Asher: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:41 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Asher were 41,500.
NUM 1:42 From the descendants of Naphtali: According to the records of their clans and families, all the males twenty years old or older who could serve in the army were listed by name.
NUM 1:43 Those of them who were numbered from the tribe of Naphtali were 53,400.
NUM 1:44 These were the men whom Moses and Aaron numbered along with the twelve leaders of Israel, each of whom was from his own family.
NUM 1:45 All the Israelites who were twenty years old or older, who could serve in Israel’s army, were numbered according to their families.
NUM 1:46 And all those numbered totaled 603,550.
NUM 1:47 But the Levites, according to the tribe of their fathers, were not numbered among them.
NUM 1:48 The Lord had said to Moses,
NUM 1:49 “Only the tribe of Levi you must not number or count with the other Israelites.
NUM 1:50 But appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony, over all its furnishings and over everything in it. They must carry the tabernacle and all its furnishings; and they must attend to it and camp around it.
NUM 1:51 Whenever the tabernacle is to move, the Levites must take it down, and whenever the tabernacle is to be reassembled, the Levites must set it up. Any unauthorized person who approaches it must be killed.
NUM 1:52 “The Israelites will camp according to their divisions, each man in his camp, and each man by his standard.
NUM 1:53 But the Levites must camp around the tabernacle of the testimony, so that the Lord’s anger will not fall on the Israelite community. The Levites are responsible for the care of the tabernacle of the testimony.”
NUM 1:54 The Israelites did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses – that is what they did.
NUM 2:1 The Lord spoke to Moses and to Aaron:
NUM 2:2 “Every one of the Israelites must camp under his standard with the emblems of his family; they must camp at some distance around the tent of meeting.
NUM 2:3 “Now those who will be camping on the east, toward the sunrise, are the divisions of the camp of Judah under their standard. The leader of the people of Judah is Nahshon son of Amminadab.
NUM 2:4 Those numbered in his division are 74,600.
NUM 2:5 Those who will be camping next to them are the tribe of Issachar. The leader of the people of Issachar is Nethanel son of Zuar.
NUM 2:6 Those numbered in his division are 54,400.
NUM 2:7 Next will be the tribe of Zebulun. The leader of the people of Zebulun is Eliab son of Helon.
NUM 2:8 Those numbered in his division are 57,400.
NUM 2:9 All those numbered of the camp of Judah, according to their divisions, are 186,400. They will travel at the front.
NUM 2:10 “On the south will be the divisions of the camp of Reuben under their standard. The leader of the people of Reuben is Elizur son of Shedeur.
NUM 2:11 Those numbered in his division are 46,500.
NUM 2:12 Those who will be camping next to them are the tribe of Simeon. The leader of the people of Simeon is Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
NUM 2:13 Those numbered in his division are 59,300.
NUM 2:14 Next will be the tribe of Gad. The leader of the people of Gad is Eliasaph son of Deuel.
NUM 2:15 Those numbered in his division are 45,650.
NUM 2:16 All those numbered of the camp of Reuben, according to their divisions, are 151,450. They will travel second.
NUM 2:17 “Then the tent of meeting with the camp of the Levites will travel in the middle of the camps. They will travel in the same order as they camped, each in his own place under his standard.
NUM 2:18 “On the west will be the divisions of the camp of Ephraim under their standard. The leader of the people of Ephraim is Elishama son of Amihud.
NUM 2:19 Those numbered in his division are 40,500.
NUM 2:20 Next to them will be the tribe of Manasseh. The leader of the people of Manasseh is Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
NUM 2:21 Those numbered in his division are 32,200.
NUM 2:22 Next will be the tribe of Benjamin. The leader of the people of Benjamin is Abidan son of Gideoni.
NUM 2:23 Those numbered in his division are 35,400.
NUM 2:24 All those numbered of the camp of Ephraim, according to their divisions, are 108,100. They will travel third.
NUM 2:25 “On the north will be the divisions of the camp of Dan, under their standards. The leader of the people of Dan is Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
NUM 2:26 Those numbered in his division are 62,700.
NUM 2:27 Those who will be camping next to them are the tribe of Asher. The leader of the people of Asher is Pagiel son of Ocran.
NUM 2:28 Those numbered in his division are 41,500.
NUM 2:29 Next will be the tribe of Naphtali. The leader of the people of Naphtali is Ahira son of Enan.
NUM 2:30 Those numbered in his division are 53,400.
NUM 2:31 All those numbered of the camp of Dan are 157,600. They will travel last, under their standards.”
NUM 2:32 These are the Israelites, numbered according to their families. All those numbered in the camps, by their divisions, are 603,550.
NUM 2:33 But the Levites were not numbered among the other Israelites, as the Lord commanded Moses.
NUM 2:34 So the Israelites did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses; that is the way they camped under their standards, and that is the way they traveled, each with his clan and family.
NUM 3:1 Now these are the records of Aaron and Moses when the Lord spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai.
NUM 3:2 These are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab, the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
NUM 3:3 These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, whom he consecrated to minister as priests.
NUM 3:4 Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord when they offered strange fire before the Lord in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children. So Eleazar and Ithamar ministered as priests in the presence of Aaron their father.
NUM 3:5 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 3:6 “Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may serve him.
NUM 3:7 They are responsible for his needs and the needs of the whole community before the tent of meeting, by attending to the service of the tabernacle.
NUM 3:8 And they are responsible for all the furnishings of the tent of meeting, and for the needs of the Israelites, as they serve in the tabernacle.
NUM 3:9 You are to assign the Levites to Aaron and his sons; they will be assigned exclusively to him out of all the Israelites.
NUM 3:10 So you are to appoint Aaron and his sons, and they will be responsible for their priesthood; but the unauthorized person who comes near must be put to death.”
NUM 3:11 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 3:12 “Look, I myself have taken the Levites from among the Israelites instead of every firstborn who opens the womb among the Israelites. So the Levites belong to me,
NUM 3:13 because all the firstborn are mine. When I destroyed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I set apart for myself all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast. They belong to me. I am the Lord.”
NUM 3:14 Then the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai:
NUM 3:15 “Number the Levites by their clans and their families; every male from a month old and upward you are to number.”
NUM 3:16 So Moses numbered them according to the word of the Lord, just as he had been commanded.
NUM 3:17 These were the sons of Levi by their names: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
NUM 3:18 These are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei.
NUM 3:19 The sons of Kohath by their families were: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
NUM 3:20 The sons of Merari by their families were Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites by their clans.
NUM 3:21 From Gershon came the family of the Libnites and the family of the Shimeites; these were the families of the Gershonites.
NUM 3:22 Those of them who were numbered, counting every male from a month old and upward, were 7,500.
NUM 3:23 The families of the Gershonites were to camp behind the tabernacle toward the west.
NUM 3:24 Now the leader of the clan of the Gershonites was Eliasaph son of Lael.
NUM 3:25 And the responsibilities of the Gershonites in the tent of meeting included the tabernacle, the tent with its covering, the curtain at the entrance of the tent of meeting,
NUM 3:26 the hangings of the courtyard, the curtain at the entrance to the courtyard that surrounded the tabernacle and the altar, and their ropes, plus all the service connected with these things.
NUM 3:27 From Kohath came the family of the Amramites, the family of the Izharites, the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites; these were the families of the Kohathites.
NUM 3:28 Counting every male from a month old and upward, there were 8,600. They were responsible for the care of the sanctuary.
NUM 3:29 The families of the Kohathites were to camp on the south side of the tabernacle.
NUM 3:30 Now the leader of the clan of the families of the Kohathites was Elizaphan son of Uzziel.
NUM 3:31 Their responsibilities included the ark, the table, the lampstand, the altars, and the utensils of the sanctuary with which they ministered, the curtain, and all their service.
NUM 3:32 Now the head of all the Levitical leaders was Eleazar son of Aaron the priest. He was appointed over those who were responsible for the sanctuary.
NUM 3:33 From Merari came the family of the Mahlites and the family of the Mushites; these were the families of Merari.
NUM 3:34 Those of them who were numbered, counting every male from a month old and upward, were 6,200.
NUM 3:35 Now the leader of the clan of the families of Merari was Zuriel son of Abihail. These were to camp on the north side of the tabernacle.
NUM 3:36 The appointed responsibilities of the Merarites included the frames of the tabernacle, its crossbars, its posts, its sockets, its utensils, plus all the service connected with these things,
NUM 3:37 and the pillars of the courtyard all around, with their sockets, their pegs, and their ropes.
NUM 3:38 But those who were to camp in front of the tabernacle on the east, in front of the tent of meeting, were Moses, Aaron, and his sons. They were responsible for the needs of the sanctuary and for the needs of the Israelites, but the unauthorized person who approached was to be put to death.
NUM 3:39 All who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron numbered by the word of the Lord, according to their families, every male from a month old and upward, were 22,000.
NUM 3:40 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Number all the firstborn males of the Israelites from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.
NUM 3:41 And take the Levites for me – I am the Lord – instead of all the firstborn males among the Israelites, and the livestock of the Levites instead of all the firstborn of the livestock of the Israelites.”
NUM 3:42 So Moses numbered all the firstborn males among the Israelites, as the Lord had commanded him.
NUM 3:43 And all the firstborn males, by the number of the names from a month old and upward, totaled 22,273.
NUM 3:44 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 3:45 “Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn males among the Israelites, and the livestock of the Levites instead of their livestock. And the Levites will be mine. I am the Lord.
NUM 3:46 And for the redemption of the 273 firstborn males of the Israelites who exceed the number of the Levites,
NUM 3:47 collect five shekels for each one individually; you are to collect this amount in the currency of the sanctuary shekel (this shekel is twenty gerahs).
NUM 3:48 And give the money for the redemption of the excess number of them to Aaron and his sons.”
NUM 3:49 So Moses took the redemption money from those who were in excess of those redeemed by the Levites.
NUM 3:50 From the firstborn males of the Israelites he collected the money, 1,365 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel.
NUM 3:51 Moses gave the redemption money to Aaron and his sons, according to the word of the Lord, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
NUM 4:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
NUM 4:2 “Take a census of the Kohathites from among the Levites, by their families and by their clans,
NUM 4:3 from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, all who enter the company to do the work in the tent of meeting.
NUM 4:4 This is the service of the Kohathites in the tent of meeting, relating to the most holy things.
NUM 4:5 When it is time for the camp to journey, Aaron and his sons must come and take down the screening curtain and cover the ark of the testimony with it.
NUM 4:6 Then they must put over it a covering of fine leather and spread over that a cloth entirely of blue, and then they must insert its poles.
NUM 4:7 “On the table of the presence they must spread a blue cloth, and put on it the dishes, the pans, the bowls, and the pitchers for pouring, and the Bread of the Presence must be on it continually.
NUM 4:8 They must spread over them a scarlet cloth, and cover the same with a covering of fine leather; and they must insert its poles.
NUM 4:9 “They must take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand of the light, with its lamps, its wick-trimmers, its trays, and all its oil vessels, with which they service it.
NUM 4:10 Then they must put it with all its utensils in a covering of fine leather, and put it on a carrying beam.
NUM 4:11 “They must spread a blue cloth on the gold altar, and cover it with a covering of fine leather; and they must insert its poles.
NUM 4:12 Then they must take all the utensils of the service, with which they serve in the sanctuary, put them in a blue cloth, cover them with a covering of fine leather, and put them on a carrying beam.
NUM 4:13 Also, they must take away the ashes from the altar and spread a purple cloth over it.
NUM 4:14 Then they must place on it all its implements with which they serve there – the trays, the meat forks, the shovels, the basins, and all the utensils of the altar – and they must spread on it a covering of fine leather, and then insert its poles.
NUM 4:15 “When Aaron and his sons have finished covering the sanctuary and all the furnishings of the sanctuary, when the camp is ready to journey, then the Kohathites will come to carry them; but they must not touch any holy thing, or they will die. These are the responsibilities of the Kohathites with the tent of meeting.
NUM 4:16 “The appointed responsibility of Eleazar son of Aaron the priest is for the oil for the light, and the spiced incense, and the daily grain offering, and the anointing oil; he also has the appointed responsibility over all the tabernacle with all that is in it, over the sanctuary and over all its furnishings.”
NUM 4:17 Then the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
NUM 4:18 “Do not allow the tribe of the families of the Kohathites to be cut off from among the Levites;
NUM 4:19 but in order that they will live and not die when they approach the most holy things, do this for them: Aaron and his sons will go in and appoint each man to his service and his responsibility.
NUM 4:20 But the Kohathites are not to go in to watch while the holy things are being covered, or they will die.”
NUM 4:21 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 4:22 “Also take a census of the Gershonites, by their clans and by their families.
NUM 4:23 You must number them from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, all who enter the company to do the work of the tent of meeting.
NUM 4:24 This is the service of the families of Gershonites, as they serve and carry it.
NUM 4:25 They must carry the curtains for the tabernacle and the tent of meeting with its covering, the covering of fine leather that is over it, the curtains for the entrance of the tent of meeting,
NUM 4:26 the hangings for the courtyard, the curtain for the entrance of the gate of the court, which is around the tabernacle and the altar, and their ropes, along with all the furnishings for their service and everything that is made for them. So they are to serve.
NUM 4:27 “All the service of the Gershonites, whether carrying loads or for any of their work, will be at the direction of Aaron and his sons. You will assign them all their tasks as their responsibility.
NUM 4:28 This is the service of the families of the Gershonites concerning the tent of meeting. Their responsibilities will be under the authority of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
NUM 4:29 “As for the sons of Merari, you are to number them by their families and by their clans.
NUM 4:30 You must number them from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, all who enter the company to do the work of the tent of meeting.
NUM 4:31 This is what they are responsible to carry as their entire service in the tent of meeting: the frames of the tabernacle, its crossbars, its posts, its sockets,
NUM 4:32 and the posts of the surrounding courtyard with their sockets, tent pegs, and ropes, along with all their furnishings and everything for their service. You are to assign by names the items that each man is responsible to carry.
NUM 4:33 This is the service of the families of the Merarites, their entire service concerning the tent of meeting, under the authority of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.”
NUM 4:34 So Moses and Aaron and the leaders of the community numbered the Kohathites by their families and by clans,
NUM 4:35 from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, everyone who entered the company for the work in the tent of meeting;
NUM 4:36 and those of them numbered by their families were 2,750.
NUM 4:37 These were those numbered from the families of the Kohathites, everyone who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the Lord by the authority of Moses.
NUM 4:38 Those numbered from the Gershonites, by their families and by their clans,
NUM 4:39 from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, everyone who entered the company for the work in the tent of meeting –
NUM 4:40 those of them numbered by their families, by their clans, were 2,630.
NUM 4:41 These were those numbered from the families of the Gershonites, everyone who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the Lord.
NUM 4:42 Those numbered from the families of the Merarites, by their families, by their clans,
NUM 4:43 from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, everyone who entered the company for the work in the tent of meeting –
NUM 4:44 those of them numbered by their families were 3,200.
NUM 4:45 These are those numbered from the families of the Merarites, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the Lord by the authority of Moses.
NUM 4:46 All who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses, Aaron, and the leaders of Israel numbered by their families and by their clans,
NUM 4:47 from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old, everyone who entered to do the work of service and the work of carrying relating to the tent of meeting –
NUM 4:48 those of them numbered were 8,580.
NUM 4:49 According to the word of the Lord they were numbered, by the authority of Moses, each according to his service and according to what he was to carry. Thus were they numbered by him, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
NUM 5:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 5:2 “Command the Israelites to expel from the camp every leper, everyone who has a discharge, and whoever becomes defiled by a corpse.
NUM 5:3 You must expel both men and women; you must put them outside the camp, so that they will not defile their camps, among which I live.”
NUM 5:4 So the Israelites did so, and expelled them outside the camp. As the Lord had spoken to Moses, so the Israelites did.
NUM 5:5 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 5:6 “Tell the Israelites, ‘When a man or a woman commits any sin that people commit, thereby breaking faith with the Lord, and that person is found guilty,
NUM 5:7 then he must confess his sin that he has committed and must make full reparation, add one fifth to it, and give it to whomever he wronged.
NUM 5:8 But if the individual has no close relative to whom reparation can be made for the wrong, the reparation for the wrong must be paid to the Lord for the priest, in addition to the ram of atonement by which atonement is made for him.
NUM 5:9 Every offering of all the Israelites’ holy things that they bring to the priest will be his.
NUM 5:10 Every man’s holy things will be his; whatever any man gives the priest will be his.’”
NUM 5:11 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 5:12 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If any man’s wife goes astray and behaves unfaithfully toward him,
NUM 5:13 and a man has sexual relations with her without her husband knowing it, and it is hidden that she has defiled herself, since there was no witness against her, nor was she caught –
NUM 5:14 and if jealous feelings come over him and he becomes suspicious of his wife, when she is defiled; or if jealous feelings come over him and he becomes suspicious of his wife, when she is not defiled –
NUM 5:15 then the man must bring his wife to the priest, and he must bring the offering required for her, one tenth of an ephah of barley meal; he must not pour olive oil on it or put frankincense on it, because it is a grain offering of suspicion, a grain offering for remembering, for bringing iniquity to remembrance.
NUM 5:16 “‘Then the priest will bring her near and have her stand before the Lord.
NUM 5:17 The priest will then take holy water in a pottery jar, and take some of the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle, and put it into the water.
NUM 5:18 Then the priest will have the woman stand before the Lord, uncover the woman’s head, and put the grain offering for remembering in her hands, which is the grain offering of suspicion. The priest will hold in his hand the bitter water that brings a curse.
NUM 5:19 Then the priest will put the woman under oath and say to the her, “If no other man has had sexual relations with you, and if you have not gone astray and become defiled while under your husband’s authority, may you be free from this bitter water that brings a curse.
NUM 5:20 But if you have gone astray while under your husband’s authority, and if you have defiled yourself and some man other than your husband has had sexual relations with you….”
NUM 5:21 Then the priest will put the woman under the oath of the curse and will say to the her, “The Lord make you an attested curse among your people, if the Lord makes your thigh fall away and your abdomen swell;
NUM 5:22 and this water that causes the curse will go into your stomach, and make your abdomen swell and your thigh rot.” Then the woman must say, “Amen, amen.”
NUM 5:23 “‘Then the priest will write these curses on a scroll and then scrape them off into the bitter water.
NUM 5:24 He will make the woman drink the bitter water that brings a curse, and the water that brings a curse will enter her to produce bitterness.
NUM 5:25 The priest will take the grain offering of suspicion from the woman’s hand, wave the grain offering before the Lord, and bring it to the altar.
NUM 5:26 Then the priest will take a handful of the grain offering as its memorial portion, burn it on the altar, and afterward make the woman drink the water.
NUM 5:27 When he has made her drink the water, then, if she has defiled herself and behaved unfaithfully toward her husband, the water that brings a curse will enter her to produce bitterness – her abdomen will swell, her thigh will fall away, and the woman will become a curse among her people.
NUM 5:28 But if the woman has not defiled herself, and is clean, then she will be free of ill effects and will be able to bear children.
NUM 5:29 “‘This is the law for cases of jealousy, when a wife, while under her husband’s authority, goes astray and defiles herself,
NUM 5:30 or when jealous feelings come over a man and he becomes suspicious of his wife; then he must have the woman stand before the Lord, and the priest will carry out all this law upon her.
NUM 5:31 Then the man will be free from iniquity, but that woman will bear the consequences of her iniquity.’”
NUM 6:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 6:2 “Speak to the Israelites, and tell them, ‘When either a man or a woman takes a special vow, to take a vow as a Nazirite, to separate himself to the Lord,
NUM 6:3 he must separate himself from wine and strong drink, he must drink neither vinegar made from wine nor vinegar made from strong drink, nor may he drink any juice of grapes, nor eat fresh grapes or raisins.
NUM 6:4 All the days of his separation he must not eat anything that is produced by the grapevine, from seed to skin.
NUM 6:5 “‘All the days of the vow of his separation no razor may be used on his head until the time is fulfilled for which he separated himself to the Lord. He will be holy, and he must let the locks of hair on his head grow long.
NUM 6:6 “‘All the days that he separates himself to the Lord he must not contact a dead body.
NUM 6:7 He must not defile himself even for his father or his mother or his brother or his sister if they die, because the separation for his God is on his head.
NUM 6:8 All the days of his separation he must be holy to the Lord.
NUM 6:9 “‘If anyone dies very suddenly beside him and he defiles his consecrated head, then he must shave his head on the day of his purification – on the seventh day he must shave it.
NUM 6:10 On the eighth day he is to bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest, to the entrance to the tent of meeting.
NUM 6:11 Then the priest will offer one for a purification offering and the other as a burnt offering, and make atonement for him, because of his transgression in regard to the corpse. So he must reconsecrate his head on that day.
NUM 6:12 He must rededicate to the Lord the days of his separation and bring a male lamb in its first year as a reparation offering, but the former days will not be counted because his separation was defiled.
NUM 6:13 “‘Now this is the law of the Nazirite: When the days of his separation are fulfilled, he must be brought to the entrance of the tent of meeting,
NUM 6:14 and he must present his offering to the Lord: one male lamb in its first year without blemish for a burnt offering, one ewe lamb in its first year without blemish for a purification offering, one ram without blemish for a peace offering,
NUM 6:15 and a basket of bread made without yeast, cakes of fine flour mixed with olive oil, wafers made without yeast and smeared with olive oil, and their grain offering and their drink offerings.
NUM 6:16 “‘Then the priest must present all these before the Lord and offer his purification offering and his burnt offering.
NUM 6:17 Then he must offer the ram as a peace offering to the Lord, with the basket of bread made without yeast; the priest must also offer his grain offering and his drink offering.
NUM 6:18 “‘Then the Nazirite must shave his consecrated head at the entrance to the tent of meeting and must take the hair from his consecrated head and put it on the fire where the peace offering is burning.
NUM 6:19 And the priest must take the boiled shoulder of the ram, one cake made without yeast from the basket, and one wafer made without yeast, and put them on the hands of the Nazirite after he has shaved his consecrated head;
NUM 6:20 then the priest must wave them as a wave offering before the Lord; it is a holy portion for the priest, together with the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the raised offering. After this the Nazirite may drink wine.’
NUM 6:21 “This is the law of the Nazirite who vows to the Lord his offering according to his separation, as well as whatever else he can provide. Thus he must fulfill his vow that he makes, according to the law of his separation.”
NUM 6:22 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 6:23 “Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the way you are to bless the Israelites. Say to them:
NUM 6:24 “The Lord bless you and protect you;
NUM 6:25 The Lord make his face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you;
NUM 6:26 The Lord lift up his countenance upon you and give you peace.”’
NUM 6:27 So they will put my name on the Israelites, and I will bless them.”
NUM 7:1 When Moses had completed setting up the tabernacle, he anointed it and consecrated it and all its furnishings, and he anointed and consecrated the altar and all its utensils.
NUM 7:2 Then the leaders of Israel, the heads of their clans, made an offering. They were the leaders of the tribes; they were the ones who had been supervising the numbering.
NUM 7:3 They brought their offering before the Lord, six covered carts and twelve oxen – one cart for every two of the leaders, and an ox for each one; and they presented them in front of the tabernacle.
NUM 7:4 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 7:5 “Receive these gifts from them, that they may be used in doing the work of the tent of meeting; and you must give them to the Levites, to every man as his service requires.”
NUM 7:6 So Moses accepted the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites.
NUM 7:7 He gave two carts and four oxen to the Gershonites, as their service required;
NUM 7:8 and he gave four carts and eight oxen to the Merarites, as their service required, under the authority of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
NUM 7:9 But to the Kohathites he gave none, because the service of the holy things, which they carried on their shoulders, was their responsibility.
NUM 7:10 The leaders offered gifts for the dedication of the altar when it was anointed. And the leaders presented their offering before the altar.
NUM 7:11 For the Lord said to Moses, “They must present their offering, one leader for each day, for the dedication of the altar.”
NUM 7:12 The one who presented his offering on the first day was Nahshon son of Amminadab, from the tribe of Judah.
NUM 7:13 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels, and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:14 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:15 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:16 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:17 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nahshon son of Amminadab.
NUM 7:18 On the second day Nethanel son of Zuar, leader of Issachar, presented an offering.
NUM 7:19 He offered for his offering one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:20 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:21 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:22 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:23 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nethanel son of Zuar.
NUM 7:24 On the third day Eliab son of Helon, leader of the Zebulunites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:25 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:26 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:27 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:28 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:29 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliab son of Helon.
NUM 7:30 On the fourth day Elizur son of Shedeur, leader of the Reubenites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:31 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:32 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:33 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:34 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:35 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elizur son of Shedeur.
NUM 7:36 On the fifth day Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai, leader of the Simeonites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:37 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:38 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels;
NUM 7:39 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:40 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:41 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Sheloumiel son of Zurishaddai.
NUM 7:42 On the sixth day Eliasaph son of Deuel, leader of the Gadites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:43 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:44 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels;
NUM 7:45 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:46 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:47 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliasaph son of Deuel.
NUM 7:48 On the seventh day Elishama son of Ammihud, leader of the Ephraimites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:49 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:50 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:51 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:52 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:53 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elishama son of Ammihud.
NUM 7:54 On the eighth day Gamaliel son of Pedahzur, leader of the Manassehites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:55 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:56 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:57 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:58 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:59 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
NUM 7:60 On the ninth day Abidan son of Gideoni, leader of the Benjaminites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:61 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:62 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:63 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:64 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:65 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Abidan son of Gideoni.
NUM 7:66 On the tenth day Ahiezer son of Amishaddai, leader of the Danites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:67 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:68 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:69 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:70 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:71 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahiezer son of Amishaddai.
NUM 7:72 On the eleventh day Pagiel son of Ocran, leader of the Asherites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:73 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:74 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
NUM 7:75 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:76 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:77 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Pagiel son of Ocran.
NUM 7:78 On the twelfth day Ahira son of Enan, leader of the Naphtalites, presented an offering.
NUM 7:79 His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering;
NUM 7:80 one gold pan weighing 10 shekels;
NUM 7:81 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
NUM 7:82 one male goat for a purification offering;
NUM 7:83 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahira son of Enan.
NUM 7:84 This was the dedication for the altar from the leaders of Israel, when it was anointed: twelve silver platters, twelve silver sprinkling bowls, and twelve gold pans.
NUM 7:85 Each silver platter weighed 130 shekels, and each silver sprinkling bowl weighed 70 shekels. All the silver of the vessels weighed 2,400 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel.
NUM 7:86 The twelve gold pans full of incense weighed 10 shekels each, according to the sanctuary shekel; all the gold of the pans weighed 120 shekels.
NUM 7:87 All the animals for the burnt offering were 12 young bulls, 12 rams, 12 male lambs in their first year, with their grain offering, and 12 male goats for a purification offering.
NUM 7:88 All the animals for the sacrifice for the peace offering were 24 young bulls, 60 rams, 60 male goats, and 60 lambs in their first year. These were the dedication offerings for the altar after it was anointed.
NUM 7:89 Now when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with the Lord, he heard the voice speaking to him from above the atonement lid that was on the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim. Thus he spoke to him.
NUM 8:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 8:2 “Speak to Aaron and tell him, ‘When you set up the lamps, the seven lamps are to give light in front of the lampstand.’”
NUM 8:3 And Aaron did so; he set up the lamps to face toward the front of the lampstand, as the Lord commanded Moses.
NUM 8:4 This is how the lampstand was made: It was beaten work in gold; from its shaft to its flowers it was beaten work. According to the pattern which the Lord had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand.
NUM 8:5 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 8:6 “Take the Levites from among the Israelites and purify them.
NUM 8:7 And do this to them to purify them: Sprinkle water of purification on them; then have them shave all their body and wash their clothes, and so purify themselves.
NUM 8:8 Then they are to take a young bull with its grain offering of fine flour mixed with olive oil; and you are to take a second young bull for a purification offering.
NUM 8:9 You are to bring the Levites before the tent of meeting and assemble the entire community of the Israelites.
NUM 8:10 Then you are to bring the Levites before the Lord, and the Israelites are to lay their hands on the Levites;
NUM 8:11 and Aaron is to offer the Levites before the Lord as a wave offering from the Israelites, that they may do the work of the Lord.
NUM 8:12 When the Levites lay their hands on the heads of the bulls, offer the one for a purification offering and the other for a whole burnt offering to the Lord, to make atonement for the Levites.
NUM 8:13 You are to have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons, and then offer them as a wave offering to the Lord.
NUM 8:14 And so you are to separate the Levites from among the Israelites, and the Levites will be mine.
NUM 8:15 “After this, the Levites will go in to do the work of the tent of meeting. So you must cleanse them and offer them like a wave offering.
NUM 8:16 For they are entirely given to me from among the Israelites. I have taken them for myself instead of all who open the womb, the firstborn sons of all the Israelites.
NUM 8:17 For all the firstborn males among the Israelites are mine, both humans and animals; when I destroyed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I set them apart for myself.
NUM 8:18 So I have taken the Levites instead of all the firstborn sons among the Israelites.
NUM 8:19 I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and his sons from among the Israelites, to do the work for the Israelites in the tent of meeting, and to make atonement for the Israelites, so there will be no plague among the Israelites when the Israelites come near the sanctuary.”
NUM 8:20 So Moses and Aaron and the entire community of the Israelites did this with the Levites. According to all that the Lord commanded Moses concerning the Levites, this is what the Israelites did with them.
NUM 8:21 The Levites purified themselves and washed their clothing; then Aaron presented them like a wave offering before the Lord, and Aaron made atonement for them to purify them.
NUM 8:22 After this, the Levites went in to do their work in the tent of meeting before Aaron and before his sons. As the Lord had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did.
NUM 8:23 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 8:24 “This is what pertains to the Levites: At the age of twenty-five years and upward one may begin to join the company in the work of the tent of meeting,
NUM 8:25 and at the age of fifty years they must retire from performing the work and may no longer work.
NUM 8:26 They may assist their colleagues in the tent of meeting, to attend to needs, but they must do no work. This is the way you must establish the Levites regarding their duties.”
NUM 9:1 The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt:
NUM 9:2 “The Israelites are to observe the Passover at its appointed time.
NUM 9:3 In the fourteenth day of this month, at twilight, you are to observe it at its appointed time; you must keep it in accordance with all its statutes and all its customs.”
NUM 9:4 So Moses instructed the Israelites to observe the Passover.
NUM 9:5 And they observed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at twilight in the wilderness of Sinai; in accordance with all that the Lord had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did.
NUM 9:6 It happened that some men who were ceremonially defiled by the dead body of a man could not keep the Passover on that day, so they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day.
NUM 9:7 And those men said to him, “We are ceremonially defiled by the dead body of a man; why are we kept back from offering the Lord’s offering at its appointed time among the Israelites?”
NUM 9:8 So Moses said to them, “Remain here and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you.”
NUM 9:9 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 9:10 “Tell the Israelites, ‘If any of you or of your posterity become ceremonially defiled by touching a dead body, or are on a journey far away, then he may observe the Passover to the Lord.
NUM 9:11 They may observe it on the fourteenth day of the second month at twilight; they are to eat it with bread made without yeast and with bitter herbs.
NUM 9:12 They must not leave any of it until morning, nor break any of its bones; they must observe it in accordance with every statute of the Passover.
NUM 9:13 But the man who is ceremonially clean, and was not on a journey, and fails to keep the Passover, that person must be cut off from his people. Because he did not bring the Lord’s offering at its appointed time, that man must bear his sin.
NUM 9:14 If a resident foreigner lives among you and wants to keep the Passover to the Lord, he must do so according to the statute of the Passover, and according to its custom. You must have the same statute for the resident foreigner and for the one who was born in the land.’”
NUM 9:15 On the day that the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle – the tent of the testimony – and from evening until morning there was a fiery appearance over the tabernacle.
NUM 9:16 This is the way it used to be continually: The cloud would cover it by day, and there was a fiery appearance by night.
NUM 9:17 Whenever the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the Israelites would begin their journey; and in whatever place the cloud settled, there the Israelites would make camp.
NUM 9:18 At the commandment of the Lord the Israelites would begin their journey, and at the commandment of the Lord they would make camp; as long as the cloud remained settled over the tabernacle they would camp.
NUM 9:19 When the cloud remained over the tabernacle many days, then the Israelites obeyed the instructions of the Lord and did not journey.
NUM 9:20 When the cloud remained over the tabernacle a number of days, they remained camped according to the Lord’s commandment, and according to the Lord’s commandment they would journey.
NUM 9:21 And when the cloud remained only from evening until morning, when the cloud was taken up the following morning, then they traveled on. Whether by day or by night, when the cloud was taken up they traveled.
NUM 9:22 Whether it was for two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud prolonged its stay over the tabernacle, the Israelites remained camped without traveling; but when it was taken up, they traveled on.
NUM 9:23 At the commandment of the Lord they camped, and at the commandment of the Lord they traveled on; they kept the instructions of the Lord according to the commandment of the Lord, by the authority of Moses.
NUM 10:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 10:2 “Make two trumpets of silver; you are to make them from a single hammered piece. You will use them for assembling the community and for directing the traveling of the camps.
NUM 10:3 When they blow them both, all the community must come to you to the entrance of the tent of meeting.
NUM 10:4 “But if they blow with one trumpet, then the leaders, the heads of the thousands of Israel, must come to you.
NUM 10:5 When you blow an alarm, then the camps that are located on the east side must begin to travel.
NUM 10:6 And when you blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that are located on the south side must begin to travel. An alarm must be sounded for their journeys.
NUM 10:7 But when you assemble the community, you must blow, but you must not sound an alarm.
NUM 10:8 The sons of Aaron, the priests, must blow the trumpets; and they will be to you for an eternal ordinance throughout your generations.
NUM 10:9 If you go to war in your land against an adversary who opposes you, then you must sound an alarm with the trumpets, and you will be remembered before the Lord your God, and you will be saved from your enemies.
NUM 10:10 “Also in the time when you rejoice, such as on your appointed festivals or at the beginnings of your months, you must blow with your trumpets over your burnt offerings and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings, so that they may become a memorial for you before your God: I am the Lord your God.”
NUM 10:11 On the twentieth day of the second month, in the second year, the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle of the testimony.
NUM 10:12 So the Israelites set out on their journeys from the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud settled in the wilderness of Paran.
NUM 10:13 This was the first time they set out on their journey according to the commandment of the Lord, by the authority of Moses.
NUM 10:14 The standard of the camp of the Judahites set out first according to their companies, and over his company was Nahshon son of Amminadab.
NUM 10:15 Over the company of the tribe of Issacharites was Nathanel son of Zuar,
NUM 10:16 and over the company of the tribe of the Zebulunites was Elion son of Helon.
NUM 10:17 Then the tabernacle was dismantled, and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set out, carrying the tabernacle.
NUM 10:18 The standard of the camp of Reuben set out according to their companies; over his company was Elizur son of Shedeur.
NUM 10:19 Over the company of the tribe of the Simeonites was Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai,
NUM 10:20 and over the company of the tribe of the Gadites was Eliasaph son of Deuel.
NUM 10:21 And the Kohathites set out, carrying the articles for the sanctuary; the tabernacle was to be set up before they arrived.
NUM 10:22 And the standard of the camp of the Ephraimites set out according to their companies; over his company was Elishama son of Ammihud.
NUM 10:23 Over the company of the tribe of the Manassehites was Gamaliel son of Pedahzur,
NUM 10:24 and over the company of the tribe of Benjaminites was Abidan son of Gideoni.
NUM 10:25 The standard of the camp of the Danites set out, which was the rear guard of all the camps by their companies; over his company was Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
NUM 10:26 Over the company of the tribe of the Asherites was Pagiel son of Ocran,
NUM 10:27 and over the company of the tribe of the Naphtalites was Ahira son of Enan.
NUM 10:28 These were the traveling arrangements of the Israelites according to their companies when they traveled.
NUM 10:29 Moses said to Hobab son of Reuel, the Midianite, Moses’ father-in-law, “We are journeying to the place about which the Lord said, ‘I will give it to you.’ Come with us and we will treat you well, for the Lord has promised good things for Israel.”
NUM 10:30 But Hobab said to him, “I will not go, but I will go instead to my own land and to my kindred.”
NUM 10:31 Moses said, “Do not leave us, because you know places for us to camp in the wilderness, and you could be our guide.
NUM 10:32 And if you come with us, it is certain that whatever good things the Lord will favor us with, we will share with you as well.”
NUM 10:33 So they traveled from the mountain of the Lord three days’ journey; and the ark of the covenant of the Lord was traveling before them during the three days’ journey, to find a resting place for them.
NUM 10:34 And the cloud of the Lord was over them by day, when they traveled from the camp.
NUM 10:35 And when the ark traveled, Moses would say, “Rise up, O Lord! May your enemies be scattered, and may those who hate you flee before you!”
NUM 10:36 And when it came to rest he would say, “Return, O Lord, to the many thousands of Israel!”
NUM 11:1 When the people complained, it displeased the Lord. When the Lord heard it, his anger burned, and so the fire of the Lord burned among them and consumed some of the outer parts of the camp.
NUM 11:2 When the people cried to Moses, he prayed to the Lord, and the fire died out.
NUM 11:3 So he called the name of that place Taberah because there the fire of the Lord burned among them.
NUM 11:4 Now the mixed multitude who were among them craved more desirable foods, and so the Israelites wept again and said, “If only we had meat to eat!
NUM 11:5 We remember the fish we used to eat freely in Egypt, the cucumbers, the melons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic.
NUM 11:6 But now we are dried up, and there is nothing at all before us except this manna!”
NUM 11:7 (Now the manna was like coriander seed, and its color like the color of bdellium.
NUM 11:8 And the people went about and gathered it, and ground it with mills or pounded it in mortars; they baked it in pans and made cakes of it. It tasted like fresh olive oil.
NUM 11:9 And when the dew came down on the camp in the night, the manna fell with it.)
NUM 11:10 Moses heard the people weeping throughout their families, everyone at the door of his tent; and when the anger of the Lord was kindled greatly, Moses was also displeased.
NUM 11:11 And Moses said to the Lord, “Why have you afflicted your servant? Why have I not found favor in your sight, that you lay the burden of this entire people on me?
NUM 11:12 Did I conceive this entire people? Did I give birth to them, that you should say to me, ‘Carry them in your arms, as a foster father bears a nursing child,’ to the land which you swore to their fathers?
NUM 11:13 From where shall I get meat to give to this entire people, for they cry to me, ‘Give us meat, that we may eat!’
NUM 11:14 I am not able to bear this entire people alone, because it is too heavy for me!
NUM 11:15 But if you are going to deal with me like this, then kill me immediately. If I have found favor in your sight then do not let me see my trouble.”
NUM 11:16 The Lord said to Moses, “Gather to me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom you know are elders of the people and officials over them, and bring them to the tent of meeting; let them take their position there with you.
NUM 11:17 Then I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take part of the spirit that is on you, and will put it on them, and they will bear some of the burden of the people with you, so that you do not bear it all by yourself.
NUM 11:18 “And say to the people, ‘Sanctify yourselves for tomorrow, and you will eat meat, for you have wept in the hearing of the Lord, saying, “Who will give us meat to eat, for life was good for us in Egypt?” Therefore the Lord will give you meat, and you will eat.
NUM 11:19 You will eat, not just one day, nor two days, nor five days, nor ten days, nor twenty days,
NUM 11:20 but a whole month, until it comes out your nostrils and makes you sick, because you have despised the Lord who is among you and have wept before him, saying, “Why did we ever come out of Egypt?”’”
NUM 11:21 Moses said, “The people around me are 600,000 on foot; but you say, ‘I will give them meat, that they may eat for a whole month.’
NUM 11:22 Would they have enough if the flocks and herds were slaughtered for them? If all the fish of the sea were caught for them, would they have enough?”
NUM 11:23 And the Lord said to Moses, “Is the Lord’s hand shortened? Now you will see whether my word to you will come true or not!”
NUM 11:24 So Moses went out and told the people the words of the Lord. He then gathered seventy men of the elders of the people and had them stand around the tabernacle.
NUM 11:25 And the Lord came down in the cloud and spoke to them, and he took some of the Spirit that was on Moses and put it on the seventy elders. When the Spirit rested on them, they prophesied, but did not do so again.
NUM 11:26 But two men remained in the camp; one’s name was Eldad, and the other’s name was Medad. And the spirit rested on them. (Now they were among those in the registration, but had not gone to the tabernacle.) So they prophesied in the camp.
NUM 11:27 And a young man ran and told Moses, “Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp!”
NUM 11:28 Joshua son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his choice young men, said, “My lord Moses, stop them!”
NUM 11:29 Moses said to him, “Are you jealous for me? I wish that all the Lord’s people were prophets, that the Lord would put his Spirit on them!”
NUM 11:30 Then Moses returned to the camp along with the elders of Israel.
NUM 11:31 Now a wind went out from the Lord and brought quail from the sea, and let them fall near the camp, about a day’s journey on this side, and about a day’s journey on the other side, all around the camp, and about three feet high on the surface of the ground.
NUM 11:32 And the people stayed up all that day, all that night, and all the next day, and gathered the quail. The one who gathered the least gathered ten homers, and they spread them out for themselves all around the camp.
NUM 11:33 But while the meat was still between their teeth, before they chewed it, the anger of the Lord burned against the people, and the Lord struck the people with a very great plague.
NUM 11:34 So the name of that place was called Kibroth Hattaavah, because there they buried the people that craved different food.
NUM 11:35 The people traveled from Kibroth Hattaavah to Hazeroth, and they stayed at Hazeroth.
NUM 12:1 Then Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman he had married (for he had married an Ethiopian woman).
NUM 12:2 They said, “Has the Lord only spoken through Moses? Has he not also spoken through us?” And the Lord heard it.
NUM 12:3 (Now the man Moses was very humble, more so than any man on the face of the earth.)
NUM 12:4 The Lord spoke immediately to Moses, Aaron, and Miriam: “The three of you come to the tent of meeting.” So the three of them went.
NUM 12:5 And the Lord came down in a pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the tent; he then called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came forward.
NUM 12:6 The Lord said, “Hear now my words: If there is a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known to him in a vision; I will speak with him in a dream.
NUM 12:7 My servant Moses is not like this; he is faithful in all my house.
NUM 12:8 With him I will speak face to face, openly, and not in riddles; and he will see the form of the Lord. Why then were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?”
NUM 12:9 The anger of the Lord burned against them, and he departed.
NUM 12:10 When the cloud departed from above the tent, Miriam became leprous as snow. Then Aaron looked at Miriam, and she was leprous!
NUM 12:11 So Aaron said to Moses, “O my lord, please do not hold this sin against us, in which we have acted foolishly and have sinned!
NUM 12:12 Do not let her be like a baby born dead, whose flesh is half-consumed when it comes out of its mother’s womb!”
NUM 12:13 Then Moses cried to the Lord, “Heal her now, O God.”
NUM 12:14 The Lord said to Moses, “If her father had only spit in her face, would she not have been disgraced for seven days? Shut her out from the camp seven days, and afterward she can be brought back in again.”
NUM 12:15 So Miriam was shut outside of the camp for seven days, and the people did not journey on until Miriam was brought back in.
NUM 12:16 After that the people moved from Hazeroth and camped in the wilderness of Paran.
NUM 13:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 13:2 “Send out men to investigate the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the Israelites. You are to send one man from each ancestral tribe, each one a leader among them.”
NUM 13:3 So Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran at the command of the Lord. All of them were leaders of the Israelites.
NUM 13:4 Now these were their names: from the tribe of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur;
NUM 13:5 from the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori;
NUM 13:6 from the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;
NUM 13:7 from the tribe of Issachar, Igal son of Joseph;
NUM 13:8 from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea son of Nun;
NUM 13:9 from the tribe of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu;
NUM 13:10 from the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel son of Sodi;
NUM 13:11 from the tribe of Joseph, namely, the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi son of Susi;
NUM 13:12 from the tribe of Dan, Ammiel son of Gemalli;
NUM 13:13 from the tribe of Asher, Sethur son of Michael;
NUM 13:14 from the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vopshi;
NUM 13:15 from the tribe of Gad, Geuel son of Maki.
NUM 13:16 These are the names of the men whom Moses sent to investigate the land. And Moses gave Hoshea son of Nun the name Joshua.
NUM 13:17 When Moses sent them to investigate the land of Canaan, he told them, “Go up through the Negev, and then go up into the hill country
NUM 13:18 and see what the land is like, and whether the people who live in it are strong or weak, few or many,
NUM 13:19 and whether the land they live in is good or bad, and whether the cities they inhabit are like camps or fortified cities,
NUM 13:20 and whether the land is rich or poor, and whether or not there are forests in it. And be brave, and bring back some of the fruit of the land.” Now it was the time of year for the first ripe grapes.
NUM 13:21 So they went up and investigated the land from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, at the entrance of Hamath.
NUM 13:22 When they went up through the Negev, they came to Hebron where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, descendants of Anak, were living. (Now Hebron had been built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)
NUM 13:23 When they came to the valley of Eshcol, they cut down from there a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they carried it on a staff between two men, as well as some of the pomegranates and the figs.
NUM 13:24 That place was called the Eshcol Valley, because of the cluster of grapes that the Israelites cut from there.
NUM 13:25 They returned from investigating the land after forty days.
NUM 13:26 They came back to Moses and Aaron and to the whole community of the Israelites in the wilderness of Paran at Kadesh. They reported to the whole community and showed the fruit of the land.
NUM 13:27 They told Moses, “We went to the land where you sent us. It is indeed flowing with milk and honey, and this is its fruit.
NUM 13:28 But the inhabitants are strong, and the cities are fortified and very large. Moreover we saw the descendants of Anak there.
NUM 13:29 The Amalekites live in the land of the Negev; the Hittites, Jebusites, and Amorites live in the hill country; and the Canaanites live by the sea and along the banks of the Jordan.”
NUM 13:30 Then Caleb silenced the people before Moses, saying, “Let us go up and occupy it, for we are well able to conquer it.”
NUM 13:31 But the men who had gone up with him said, “We are not able to go up against these people, because they are stronger than we are!”
NUM 13:32 Then they presented the Israelites with a discouraging report of the land they had investigated, saying, “The land that we passed through to investigate is a land that devours its inhabitants. All the people we saw there are of great stature.
NUM 13:33 We even saw the Nephilim there (the descendants of Anak came from the Nephilim), and we seemed liked grasshoppers both to ourselves and to them.”
NUM 14:1 Then all the community raised a loud cry, and the people wept that night.
NUM 14:2 And all the Israelites murmured against Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregation said to them, “If only we had died in the land of Egypt, or if only we had perished in this wilderness!
NUM 14:3 Why has the Lord brought us into this land only to be killed by the sword, that our wives and our children should become plunder? Wouldn’t it be better for us to return to Egypt?”
NUM 14:4 So they said to one another, “Let’s appoint a leader and return to Egypt.”
NUM 14:5 Then Moses and Aaron fell down with their faces to the ground before the whole assembled community of the Israelites.
NUM 14:6 And Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh, two of those who had investigated the land, tore their garments.
NUM 14:7 They said to the whole community of the Israelites, “The land we passed through to investigate is an exceedingly good land.
NUM 14:8 If the Lord delights in us, then he will bring us into this land and give it to us – a land that is flowing with milk and honey.
NUM 14:9 Only do not rebel against the Lord, and do not fear the people of the land, for they are bread for us. Their protection has turned aside from them, but the Lord is with us. Do not fear them!”
NUM 14:10 However, the whole community threatened to stone them. But the glory of the Lord appeared to all the Israelites at the tent of meeting.
NUM 14:11 The Lord said to Moses, “How long will this people despise me, and how long will they not believe in me, in spite of the signs that I have done among them?
NUM 14:12 I will strike them with the pestilence, and I will disinherit them; I will make you into a nation that is greater and mightier than they!”
NUM 14:13 Moses said to the Lord, “When the Egyptians hear it – for you brought up this people by your power from among them –
NUM 14:14 then they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land. They have heard that you, Lord, are among this people, that you, Lord, are seen face to face, that your cloud stands over them, and that you go before them by day in a pillar of cloud and in a pillar of fire by night.
NUM 14:15 If you kill this entire people at once, then the nations that have heard of your fame will say,
NUM 14:16 ‘Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land that he swore to them, he killed them in the wilderness.’
NUM 14:17 So now, let the power of my Lord be great, just as you have said,
NUM 14:18 ‘The Lord is slow to anger and abounding in loyal love, forgiving iniquity and transgression, but by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children until the third and fourth generations.’
NUM 14:19 Please forgive the iniquity of this people according to your great loyal love, just as you have forgiven this people from Egypt even until now.”
NUM 14:20 Then the Lord said, “I have forgiven them as you asked.
NUM 14:21 But truly, as I live, all the earth will be filled with the glory of the Lord.
NUM 14:22 For all the people have seen my glory and my signs that I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and yet have tempted me now these ten times, and have not obeyed me,
NUM 14:23 they will by no means see the land that I swore to their fathers, nor will any of them who despised me see it.
NUM 14:24 Only my servant Caleb, because he had a different spirit and has followed me fully – I will bring him into the land where he had gone, and his descendants will possess it.
NUM 14:25 (Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites were living in the valleys.) Tomorrow, turn and journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.”
NUM 14:26 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
NUM 14:27 “How long must I bear with this evil congregation that murmurs against me? I have heard the complaints of the Israelites that they murmured against me.
NUM 14:28 Say to them, ‘As I live, says the Lord, I will surely do to you just what you have spoken in my hearing.
NUM 14:29 Your dead bodies will fall in this wilderness – all those of you who were numbered, according to your full number, from twenty years old and upward, who have murmured against me.
NUM 14:30 You will by no means enter into the land where I swore to settle you. The only exceptions are Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun.
NUM 14:31 But I will bring in your little ones, whom you said would become victims of war, and they will enjoy the land that you have despised.
NUM 14:32 But as for you, your dead bodies will fall in this wilderness,
NUM 14:33 and your children will wander in the wilderness forty years and suffer for your unfaithfulness, until your dead bodies lie finished in the wilderness.
NUM 14:34 According to the number of the days you have investigated this land, forty days – one day for a year – you will suffer for your iniquities, forty years, and you will know what it means to thwart me.
NUM 14:35 I, the Lord, have said, “I will surely do so to all this evil congregation that has gathered together against me. In this wilderness they will be finished, and there they will die!”’”
NUM 14:36 The men whom Moses sent to investigate the land, who returned and made the whole community murmur against him by producing an evil report about the land,
NUM 14:37 those men who produced the evil report about the land, died by the plague before the Lord.
NUM 14:38 But Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh, who were among the men who went to investigate the land, lived.
NUM 14:39 When Moses told these things to all the Israelites, the people mourned greatly.
NUM 14:40 And early in the morning they went up to the crest of the hill country, saying, “Here we are, and we will go up to the place that the Lord commanded, for we have sinned.”
NUM 14:41 But Moses said, “Why are you now transgressing the commandment of the Lord? It will not succeed!
NUM 14:42 Do not go up, for the Lord is not among you, and you will be defeated before your enemies.
NUM 14:43 For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and you will fall by the sword. Because you have turned away from the Lord, the Lord will not be with you.”
NUM 14:44 But they dared to go up to the crest of the hill, although neither the ark of the covenant of the Lord nor Moses departed from the camp.
NUM 14:45 So the Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill country swooped down and attacked them as far as Hormah.
NUM 15:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 15:2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land where you are to live, which I am giving you,
NUM 15:3 and you make an offering by fire to the Lord from the herd or from the flock (whether a burnt offering or a sacrifice for discharging a vow or as a freewill offering or in your solemn feasts) to create a pleasing aroma to the Lord,
NUM 15:4 then the one who presents his offering to the Lord must bring a grain offering of one-tenth of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with one fourth of a hin of olive oil.
NUM 15:5 You must also prepare one-fourth of a hin of wine for a drink offering with the burnt offering or the sacrifice for each lamb.
NUM 15:6 Or for a ram, you must prepare as a grain offering two-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with one-third of a hin of olive oil,
NUM 15:7 and for a drink offering you must offer one-third of a hin of wine as a pleasing aroma to the Lord.
NUM 15:8 And when you prepare a young bull as a burnt offering or a sacrifice for discharging a vow or as a peace offering to the Lord,
NUM 15:9 then a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with half a hin of olive oil must be presented with the young bull,
NUM 15:10 and you must present as the drink offering half a hin of wine with the fire offering as a pleasing aroma to the Lord.
NUM 15:11 This is what is to be done for each ox, or each ram, or each of the male lambs or the goats.
NUM 15:12 You must do so for each one according to the number that you prepare.
NUM 15:13 “‘Every native-born person must do these things in this way to present an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the Lord.
NUM 15:14 If a resident foreigner is living with you – or whoever is among you in future generations – and prepares an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the Lord, he must do it the same way you are to do it.
NUM 15:15 One statute must apply to you who belong to the congregation and to the resident foreigner who is living among you, as a permanent statute for your future generations. You and the resident foreigner will be alike before the Lord.
NUM 15:16 One law and one custom must apply to you and to the resident foreigner who lives alongside you.’”
NUM 15:17 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 15:18 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land to which I am bringing you
NUM 15:19 and you eat some of the food of the land, you must offer up a raised offering to the Lord.
NUM 15:20 You must offer up a cake of the first of your finely ground flour as a raised offering; as you offer the raised offering of the threshing floor, so you must offer it up.
NUM 15:21 You must give to the Lord some of the first of your finely ground flour as a raised offering in your future generations.
NUM 15:22 “‘If you sin unintentionally and do not observe all these commandments that the Lord has spoken to Moses –
NUM 15:23 all that the Lord has commanded you by the authority of Moses, from the day that the Lord commanded Moses and continuing through your future generations –
NUM 15:24 then if anything is done unintentionally without the knowledge of the community, the whole community must prepare one young bull for a burnt offering – for a pleasing aroma to the Lord – along with its grain offering and its customary drink offering, and one male goat for a purification offering.
NUM 15:25 And the priest is to make atonement for the whole community of the Israelites, and they will be forgiven, because it was unintentional and they have brought their offering, an offering made by fire to the Lord, and their purification offering before the Lord, for their unintentional offense.
NUM 15:26 And the whole community of the Israelites and the resident foreigner who lives among them will be forgiven, since all the people were involved in the unintentional offense.
NUM 15:27 “‘If any person sins unintentionally, then he must bring a yearling female goat for a purification offering.
NUM 15:28 And the priest must make atonement for the person who sins unintentionally – when he sins unintentionally before the Lord – to make atonement for him, and he will be forgiven.
NUM 15:29 You must have one law for the person who sins unintentionally, both for the native-born among the Israelites and for the resident foreigner who lives among them.
NUM 15:30 “‘But the person who acts defiantly, whether native-born or a resident foreigner, insults the Lord. That person must be cut off from among his people.
NUM 15:31 Because he has despised the word of the Lord and has broken his commandment, that person must be completely cut off. His iniquity will be on him.’”
NUM 15:32 When the Israelites were in the wilderness they found a man gathering wood on the Sabbath day.
NUM 15:33 Those who found him gathering wood brought him to Moses and Aaron and to the whole community.
NUM 15:34 They put him in custody, because there was no clear instruction about what should be done to him.
NUM 15:35 Then the Lord said to Moses, “The man must surely be put to death; the whole community must stone him with stones outside the camp.”
NUM 15:36 So the whole community took him outside the camp and stoned him to death, just as the Lord commanded Moses.
NUM 15:37 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 15:38 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them to make tassels for themselves on the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and put a blue thread on the tassel of the corners.
NUM 15:39 You must have this tassel so that you may look at it and remember all the commandments of the Lord and obey them and so that you do not follow after your own heart and your own eyes that lead you to unfaithfulness.
NUM 15:40 Thus you will remember and obey all my commandments and be holy to your God.
NUM 15:41 I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the Lord your God.”
NUM 16:1 Now Korah son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On son of Peleth, who were Reubenites, took men
NUM 16:2 and rebelled against Moses, along with some of the Israelites, 250 leaders of the community, chosen from the assembly, famous men.
NUM 16:3 And they assembled against Moses and Aaron, saying to them, “You take too much upon yourselves, seeing that the whole community is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them. Why then do you exalt yourselves above the community of the Lord?”
NUM 16:4 When Moses heard it he fell down with his face to the ground.
NUM 16:5 Then he said to Korah and to all his company, “In the morning the Lord will make known who are his, and who is holy. He will cause that person to approach him; the person he has chosen he will cause to approach him.
NUM 16:6 Do this, Korah, you and all your company: Take censers,
NUM 16:7 put fire in them, and set incense on them before the Lord tomorrow, and the man whom the Lord chooses will be holy. You take too much upon yourselves, you sons of Levi!”
NUM 16:8 Moses said to Korah, “Listen now, you sons of Levi!
NUM 16:9 Does it seem too small a thing to you that the God of Israel has separated you from the community of Israel to bring you near to himself, to perform the service of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the community to minister to them?
NUM 16:10 He has brought you near and all your brothers, the sons of Levi, with you. Do you now seek the priesthood also?
NUM 16:11 Therefore you and all your company have assembled together against the Lord! And Aaron – what is he that you murmur against him?”
NUM 16:12 Then Moses summoned Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, but they said, “We will not come up.
NUM 16:13 Is it a small thing that you have brought us up out of the land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness? Now do you want to make yourself a prince over us?
NUM 16:14 Moreover, you have not brought us into a land that flows with milk and honey, nor given us an inheritance of fields and vineyards. Do you think you can blind these men? We will not come up.”
NUM 16:15 Moses was very angry, and he said to the Lord, “Have no respect for their offering! I have not taken so much as one donkey from them, nor have I harmed any one of them!”
NUM 16:16 Then Moses said to Korah, “You and all your company present yourselves before the Lord – you and they, and Aaron – tomorrow.
NUM 16:17 And each of you take his censer, put incense in it, and then each of you present his censer before the Lord: 250 censers, along with you, and Aaron – each of you with his censer.”
NUM 16:18 So everyone took his censer, put fire in it, and set incense on it, and stood at the entrance of the tent of meeting, with Moses and Aaron.
NUM 16:19 When Korah assembled the whole community against them at the entrance of the tent of meeting, then the glory of the Lord appeared to the whole community.
NUM 16:20 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
NUM 16:21 “Separate yourselves from among this community, that I may consume them in an instant.”
NUM 16:22 Then they threw themselves down with their faces to the ground and said, “O God, the God of the spirits of all people, will you be angry with the whole community when only one man sins?”
NUM 16:23 So the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 16:24 “Tell the community: ‘Get away from around the homes of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.’”
NUM 16:25 Then Moses got up and went to Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel went after him.
NUM 16:26 And he said to the community, “Move away from the tents of these wicked men, and do not touch anything they have, lest you be destroyed because of all their sins.”
NUM 16:27 So they got away from the homes of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram on every side, and Dathan and Abiram came out and stationed themselves in the entrances of their tents with their wives, their children, and their toddlers.
NUM 16:28 Then Moses said, “This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these works, for I have not done them of my own will.
NUM 16:29 If these men die a natural death, or if they share the fate of all men, then the Lord has not sent me.
NUM 16:30 But if the Lord does something entirely new, and the earth opens its mouth and swallows them up along with all that they have, and they go down alive to the grave, then you will know that these men have despised the Lord!”
NUM 16:31 When he had finished speaking all these words, the ground that was under them split open,
NUM 16:32 and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them, along with their households, and all Korah’s men, and all their goods.
NUM 16:33 They and all that they had went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed over them. So they perished from among the community.
NUM 16:34 All the Israelites who were around them fled at their cry, for they said, “What if the earth swallows us too?”
NUM 16:35 Then a fire went out from the Lord and devoured the 250 men who offered incense.
NUM 16:36 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 16:37 “Tell Eleazar son of Aaron the priest to pick up the censers out of the flame, for they are holy, and then scatter the coals of fire at a distance.
NUM 16:38 As for the censers of these men who sinned at the cost of their lives, they must be made into hammered sheets for covering the altar, because they presented them before the Lord and sanctified them. They will become a sign to the Israelites.”
NUM 16:39 So Eleazar the priest took the bronze censers presented by those who had been burned up, and they were hammered out as a covering for the altar.
NUM 16:40 It was a memorial for the Israelites, that no outsider who is not a descendant of Aaron should approach to burn incense before the Lord, that he might not become like Korah and his company – just as the Lord had spoken by the authority of Moses.
NUM 16:41 But on the next day the whole community of Israelites murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, “You have killed the Lord’s people!”
NUM 16:42 When the community assembled against Moses and Aaron, they turned toward the tent of meeting – and the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared.
NUM 16:43 Then Moses and Aaron stood before the tent of meeting.
NUM 16:44 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 16:45 “Get away from this community, so that I can consume them in an instant!” But they threw themselves down with their faces to the ground.
NUM 16:46 Then Moses said to Aaron, “Take the censer, put burning coals from the altar in it, place incense on it, and go quickly into the assembly and make atonement for them, for wrath has gone out from the Lord – the plague has begun!”
NUM 16:47 So Aaron did as Moses commanded and ran into the middle of the assembly, where the plague was just beginning among the people. So he placed incense on the coals and made atonement for the people.
NUM 16:48 He stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stopped.
NUM 16:49 Now 14,700 people died in the plague, in addition to those who died in the event with Korah.
NUM 16:50 Then Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and the plague was stopped.
NUM 17:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 17:2 “Speak to the Israelites, and receive from them a staff from each tribe, one from every tribal leader, twelve staffs; you must write each man’s name on his staff.
NUM 17:3 You must write Aaron’s name on the staff of Levi; for one staff is for the head of every tribe.
NUM 17:4 You must place them in the tent of meeting before the ark of the covenant where I meet with you.
NUM 17:5 And the staff of the man whom I choose will blossom; so I will rid myself of the complaints of the Israelites, which they murmur against you.”
NUM 17:6 So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and each of their leaders gave him a staff, one for each leader, according to their tribes – twelve staffs; the staff of Aaron was among their staffs.
NUM 17:7 Then Moses placed the staffs before the Lord in the tent of the testimony.
NUM 17:8 On the next day Moses went into the tent of the testimony – and the staff of Aaron for the house of Levi had sprouted, and brought forth buds, and produced blossoms, and yielded almonds!
NUM 17:9 So Moses brought out all the staffs from before the Lord to all the Israelites. They looked at them, and each man took his staff.
NUM 17:10 The Lord said to Moses, “Bring Aaron’s staff back before the testimony to be preserved for a sign to the rebels, so that you may bring their murmurings to an end before me, that they will not die.”
NUM 17:11 So Moses did as the Lord commanded him – this is what he did.
NUM 17:12 The Israelites said to Moses, “We are bound to die! We perish, we all perish!
NUM 17:13 Anyone who even comes close to the tabernacle of the Lord will die! Are we all to die?”
NUM 18:1 The Lord said to Aaron, “You and your sons and your tribe with you must bear the iniquity of the sanctuary, and you and your sons with you must bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
NUM 18:2 “Bring with you your brothers, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of your father, so that they may join with you and minister to you while you and your sons with you are before the tent of the testimony.
NUM 18:3 They must be responsible to care for you and to care for the entire tabernacle. However, they must not come near the furnishings of the sanctuary and the altar, or both they and you will die.
NUM 18:4 They must join with you, and they will be responsible for the care of the tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent, but no unauthorized person may approach you.
NUM 18:5 You will be responsible for the care of the sanctuary and the care of the altar, so that there will be no more wrath on the Israelites.
NUM 18:6 I myself have chosen your brothers the Levites from among the Israelites. They are given to you as a gift from the Lord, to perform the duties of the tent of meeting.
NUM 18:7 But you and your sons with you are responsible for your priestly duties, for everything at the altar and within the curtain. And you must serve. I give you the priesthood as a gift for service; but the unauthorized person who approaches must be put to death.”
NUM 18:8 The Lord spoke to Aaron, “See, I have given you the responsibility for my raised offerings; I have given all the holy things of the Israelites to you as your priestly portion and to your sons as a perpetual ordinance.
NUM 18:9 Of all the most holy offerings reserved from the fire this will be yours: Every offering of theirs, whether from every grain offering or from every purification offering or from every reparation offering which they bring to me, will be most holy for you and for your sons.
NUM 18:10 You are to eat it as a most holy offering; every male may eat it. It will be holy to you.
NUM 18:11 “And this is yours: the raised offering of their gift, along with all the wave offerings of the Israelites. I have given them to you and to your sons and daughters with you as a perpetual ordinance. Everyone who is ceremonially clean in your household may eat of it.
NUM 18:12 “All the best of the olive oil and all the best of the wine and of the wheat, the first fruits of these things that they give to the Lord, I have given to you.
NUM 18:13 And whatever first ripe fruit in their land they bring to the Lord will be yours; everyone who is ceremonially clean in your household may eat of it.
NUM 18:14 “Everything devoted in Israel will be yours.
NUM 18:15 The firstborn of every womb which they present to the Lord, whether human or animal, will be yours. Nevertheless, the firstborn sons you must redeem, and the firstborn males of unclean animals you must redeem.
NUM 18:16 And those that must be redeemed you are to redeem when they are a month old, according to your estimation, for five shekels of silver according to the sanctuary shekel (which is twenty gerahs).
NUM 18:17 But you must not redeem the firstborn of a cow or a sheep or a goat; they are holy. You must splash their blood on the altar and burn their fat for an offering made by fire for a pleasing aroma to the Lord.
NUM 18:18 And their meat will be yours, just as the breast and the right hip of the raised offering is yours.
NUM 18:19 All the raised offerings of the holy things that the Israelites offer to the Lord, I have given to you, and to your sons and daughters with you, as a perpetual ordinance. It is a covenant of salt forever before the Lord for you and for your descendants with you.”
NUM 18:20 The Lord spoke to Aaron, “You will have no inheritance in their land, nor will you have any portion of property among them – I am your portion and your inheritance among the Israelites.
NUM 18:21 See, I have given the Levites all the tithes in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they perform – the service of the tent of meeting.
NUM 18:22 No longer may the Israelites approach the tent of meeting, or else they will bear their sin and die.
NUM 18:23 But the Levites must perform the service of the tent of meeting, and they must bear their iniquity. It will be a perpetual ordinance throughout your generations that among the Israelites the Levites have no inheritance.
NUM 18:24 But I have given to the Levites for an inheritance the tithes of the Israelites that are offered to the Lord as a raised offering. That is why I said to them that among the Israelites they are to have no inheritance.”
NUM 18:25 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 18:26 “You are to speak to the Levites, and you must tell them, ‘When you receive from the Israelites the tithe that I have given you from them as your inheritance, then you are to offer up from it as a raised offering to the Lord a tenth of the tithe.
NUM 18:27 And your raised offering will be credited to you as though it were grain from the threshing floor or as new wine from the winepress.
NUM 18:28 Thus you are to offer up a raised offering to the Lord of all your tithes which you receive from the Israelites; and you must give the Lord’s raised offering from it to Aaron the priest.
NUM 18:29 From all your gifts you must offer up every raised offering due the Lord, from all the best of it, and the holiest part of it.’
NUM 18:30 “Therefore you will say to them, ‘When you offer up the best of it, then it will be credited to the Levites as the product of the threshing floor and as the product of the winepress.
NUM 18:31 And you may eat it in any place, you and your household, because it is your wages for your service in the tent of meeting.
NUM 18:32 And you will bear no sin concerning it when you offer up the best of it. And you must not profane the holy things of the Israelites, or else you will die.’”
NUM 19:1 The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron:
NUM 19:2 “This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord has commanded: ‘Instruct the Israelites to bring you a red heifer without blemish, which has no defect and has never carried a yoke.
NUM 19:3 You must give it to Eleazar the priest so that he can take it outside the camp, and it must be slaughtered before him.
NUM 19:4 Eleazar the priest is to take some of its blood with his finger, and sprinkle some of the blood seven times directly in front of the tent of meeting.
NUM 19:5 Then the heifer must be burned in his sight – its skin, its flesh, its blood, and its offal is to be burned.
NUM 19:6 And the priest must take cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet wool and throw them into the midst of the fire where the heifer is burning.
NUM 19:7 Then the priest must wash his clothes and bathe himself in water, and afterward he may come into the camp, but the priest will be ceremonially unclean until evening.
NUM 19:8 The one who burns it must wash his clothes in water and bathe himself in water. He will be ceremonially unclean until evening.
NUM 19:9 “‘Then a man who is ceremonially clean must gather up the ashes of the red heifer and put them in a ceremonially clean place outside the camp. They must be kept for the community of the Israelites for use in the water of purification – it is a purification for sin.
NUM 19:10 The one who gathers the ashes of the heifer must wash his clothes and be ceremonially unclean until evening. This will be a permanent ordinance both for the Israelites and the resident foreigner who lives among them.
NUM 19:11 “‘Whoever touches the corpse of any person will be ceremonially unclean seven days.
NUM 19:12 He must purify himself with water on the third day and on the seventh day, and so will be clean. But if he does not purify himself on the third day and the seventh day, then he will not be clean.
NUM 19:13 Anyone who touches the corpse of any dead person and does not purify himself defiles the tabernacle of the Lord. And that person must be cut off from Israel, because the water of purification was not sprinkled on him. He will be unclean; his uncleanness remains on him.
NUM 19:14 “‘This is the law: When a man dies in a tent, anyone who comes into the tent and all who are in the tent will be ceremonially unclean seven days.
NUM 19:15 And every open container that has no covering fastened on it is unclean.
NUM 19:16 And whoever touches the body of someone killed with a sword in the open fields, or the body of someone who died of natural causes, or a human bone, or a grave, will be unclean seven days.
NUM 19:17 “‘For a ceremonially unclean person you must take some of the ashes of the heifer burnt for purification from sin and pour fresh running water over them in a vessel.
NUM 19:18 Then a ceremonially clean person must take hyssop, dip it in the water, and sprinkle it on the tent, on all its furnishings, and on the people who were there, or on the one who touched a bone, or one killed, or one who died, or a grave.
NUM 19:19 And the clean person must sprinkle the unclean on the third day and on the seventh day; and on the seventh day he must purify him, and then he must wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and he will be clean in the evening.
NUM 19:20 But the man who is unclean and does not purify himself, that person must be cut off from among the community, because he has polluted the sanctuary of the Lord; the water of purification was not sprinkled on him, so he is unclean.
NUM 19:21 “‘So this will be a perpetual ordinance for them: The one who sprinkles the water of purification must wash his clothes, and the one who touches the water of purification will be unclean until evening.
NUM 19:22 And whatever the unclean person touches will be unclean, and the person who touches it will be unclean until evening.’”
NUM 20:1 Then the entire community of Israel entered the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and the people stayed in Kadesh. Miriam died and was buried there.
NUM 20:2 And there was no water for the community, and so they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron.
NUM 20:3 The people contended with Moses, saying, “If only we had died when our brothers died before the Lord!
NUM 20:4 Why have you brought up the Lord’s community into this wilderness? So that we and our cattle should die here?
NUM 20:5 Why have you brought us up from Egypt only to bring us to this dreadful place? It is no place for grain, or figs, or vines, or pomegranates; nor is there any water to drink!”
NUM 20:6 So Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly to the entrance to the tent of meeting. They then threw themselves down with their faces to the ground, and the glory of the Lord appeared to them.
NUM 20:7 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 20:8 “Take the staff and assemble the community, you and Aaron your brother, and then speak to the rock before their eyes. It will pour forth its water, and you will bring water out of the rock for them, and so you will give the community and their beasts water to drink.”
NUM 20:9 So Moses took the staff from before the Lord, just as he commanded him.
NUM 20:10 Then Moses and Aaron gathered the community together in front of the rock, and he said to them, “Listen, you rebels, must we bring water out of this rock for you?”
NUM 20:11 Then Moses raised his hand, and struck the rock twice with his staff. And water came out abundantly. So the community drank, and their beasts drank too.
NUM 20:12 Then the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, “Because you did not trust me enough to show me as holy before the Israelites, therefore you will not bring this community into the land I have given them.”
NUM 20:13 These are the waters of Meribah, because the Israelites contended with the Lord, and his holiness was maintained among them.
NUM 20:14 Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom: “Thus says your brother Israel: ‘You know all the hardships we have experienced,
NUM 20:15 how our ancestors went down into Egypt, and we lived in Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians treated us and our ancestors badly.
NUM 20:16 So when we cried to the Lord, he heard our voice and sent a messenger, and has brought us up out of Egypt. Now we are here in Kadesh, a town on the edge of your country.
NUM 20:17 Please let us pass through your country. We will not pass through the fields or through the vineyards, nor will we drink water from any well. We will go by the King’s Highway; we will not turn to the right or the left until we have passed through your region.’”
NUM 20:18 But Edom said to him, “You will not pass through me, or I will come out against you with the sword.”
NUM 20:19 Then the Israelites said to him, “We will go along the highway, and if we or our cattle drink any of your water, we will pay for it. We will only pass through on our feet, without doing anything else.”
NUM 20:20 But he said, “You may not pass through.” Then Edom came out against them with a large and powerful force.
NUM 20:21 So Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border; therefore Israel turned away from him.
NUM 20:22 So the entire company of Israelites traveled from Kadesh and came to Mount Hor.
NUM 20:23 And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron in Mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom. He said:
NUM 20:24 “Aaron will be gathered to his ancestors, for he will not enter into the land I have given to the Israelites because both of you rebelled against my word at the waters of Meribah.
NUM 20:25 Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up on Mount Hor.
NUM 20:26 Remove Aaron’s priestly garments and put them on Eleazar his son, and Aaron will be gathered to his ancestors and will die there.”
NUM 20:27 So Moses did as the Lord commanded; and they went up Mount Hor in the sight of the whole community.
NUM 20:28 And Moses removed Aaron’s garments and put them on his son Eleazar. So Aaron died there on the top of the mountain. And Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain.
NUM 20:29 When all the community saw that Aaron was dead, the whole house of Israel mourned for Aaron thirty days.
NUM 21:1 When the Canaanite king of Arad who lived in the Negev heard that Israel was approaching along the road to Atharim, he fought against Israel and took some of them prisoner.
NUM 21:2 So Israel made a vow to the Lord and said, “If you will indeed deliver this people into our hand, then we will utterly destroy their cities.”
NUM 21:3 The Lord listened to the voice of Israel and delivered up the Canaanites, and they utterly destroyed them and their cities. So the name of the place was called Hormah.
NUM 21:4 Then they traveled from Mount Hor by the road to the Red Sea, to go around the land of Edom, but the people became impatient along the way.
NUM 21:5 And the people spoke against God and against Moses, “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness, for there is no bread or water, and we detest this worthless food.”
NUM 21:6 So the Lord sent poisonous snakes among the people, and they bit the people; many people of Israel died.
NUM 21:7 Then the people came to Moses and said, “We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord and against you. Pray to the Lord that he would take away the snakes from us.” So Moses prayed for the people.
NUM 21:8 The Lord said to Moses, “Make a poisonous snake and set it on a pole. When anyone who is bitten looks at it, he will live.”
NUM 21:9 So Moses made a bronze snake and put it on a pole, so that if a snake had bitten someone, when he looked at the bronze snake he lived.
NUM 21:10 The Israelites traveled on and camped in Oboth.
NUM 21:11 Then they traveled on from Oboth and camped at Iye Abarim, in the wilderness that is before Moab, on the eastern side.
NUM 21:12 From there they moved on and camped in the valley of Zered.
NUM 21:13 From there they moved on and camped on the other side of the Arnon, in the wilderness that extends from the regions of the Amorites, for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.
NUM 21:14 This is why it is said in the Book of the Wars of the Lord, “Waheb in Suphah and the wadis, the Arnon
NUM 21:15 and the slope of the valleys that extends to the dwelling of Ar, and falls off at the border of Moab.”
NUM 21:16 And from there they traveled to Beer; that is the well where the Lord spoke to Moses, “Gather the people and I will give them water.”
NUM 21:17 Then Israel sang this song: “Spring up, O well, sing to it!
NUM 21:18 The well which the princes dug, which the leaders of the people opened with their scepters and their staffs.” And from the wilderness they traveled to Mattanah;
NUM 21:19 and from Mattanah to Nahaliel; and from Nahaliel to Bamoth;
NUM 21:20 and from Bamoth to the valley that is in the country of Moab, near the top of Pisgah, which overlooks the wilderness.
NUM 21:21 Then Israel sent messengers to King Sihon of the Amorites, saying,
NUM 21:22 “Let us pass through your land; we will not turn aside into the fields or into the vineyards, nor will we drink water from any well, but we will go along the King’s Highway until we pass your borders.”
NUM 21:23 But Sihon did not permit Israel to pass through his border; he gathered all his forces together and went out against Israel into the wilderness. When he came to Jahaz, he fought against Israel.
NUM 21:24 But the Israelites defeated him in battle and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, as far as the Ammonites, for the border of the Ammonites was strongly defended.
NUM 21:25 So Israel took all these cities; and Israel settled in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all its villages.
NUM 21:26 For Heshbon was the city of King Sihon of the Amorites. Now he had fought against the former king of Moab and had taken all of his land from his control, as far as the Arnon.
NUM 21:27 That is why those who speak in proverbs say, “Come to Heshbon, let it be built. Let the city of Sihon be established!
NUM 21:28 For fire went out from Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon. It has consumed Ar of Moab and the lords of the high places of Arnon.
NUM 21:29 Woe to you, Moab. You are ruined, O people of Chemosh! He has made his sons fugitives, and his daughters the prisoners of King Sihon of the Amorites.
NUM 21:30 We have overpowered them; Heshbon has perished as far as Dibon. We have shattered them as far as Nophah, which reaches to Medeba.”
NUM 21:31 So the Israelites lived in the land of the Amorites.
NUM 21:32 Moses sent spies to reconnoiter Jaazer, and they captured its villages and dispossessed the Amorites who were there.
NUM 21:33 Then they turned and went up by the road to Bashan. And King Og of Bashan and all his forces marched out against them to do battle at Edrei.
NUM 21:34 And the Lord said to Moses, “Do not fear him, for I have delivered him and all his people and his land into your hand. You will do to him what you did to King Sihon of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon.
NUM 21:35 So they defeated Og, his sons, and all his people, until there were no survivors, and they possessed his land.
NUM 22:1 The Israelites traveled on and camped in the plains of Moab on the side of the Jordan River across from Jericho.
NUM 22:2 Balak son of Zippor saw all that the Israelites had done to the Amorites.
NUM 22:3 And the Moabites were greatly afraid of the people, because they were so numerous. The Moabites were sick with fear because of the Israelites.
NUM 22:4 So the Moabites said to the elders of Midian, “Now this mass of people will lick up everything around us, as the bull devours the grass of the field. Now Balak son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at this time.
NUM 22:5 And he sent messengers to Balaam son of Beor at Pethor, which is by the Euphrates River in the land of Amaw, to summon him, saying, “Look, a nation has come out of Egypt. They cover the face of the earth, and they are settling next to me.
NUM 22:6 So now, please come and curse this nation for me, for they are too powerful for me. Perhaps I will prevail so that we may conquer them and drive them out of the land. For I know that whoever you bless is blessed, and whoever you curse is cursed.”
NUM 22:7 So the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the fee for divination in their hand. They came to Balaam and reported to him the words of Balak.
NUM 22:8 He replied to them, “Stay here tonight, and I will bring back to you whatever word the Lord may speak to me.” So the princes of Moab stayed with Balaam.
NUM 22:9 And God came to Balaam and said, “Who are these men with you?”
NUM 22:10 Balaam said to God, “Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent a message to me, saying,
NUM 22:11 “Look, a nation has come out of Egypt, and it covers the face of the earth. Come now and put a curse on them for me; perhaps I will be able to defeat them and drive them out.”
NUM 22:12 But God said to Balaam, “You must not go with them; you must not curse the people, for they are blessed.”
NUM 22:13 So Balaam got up in the morning, and said to the princes of Balak, “Go to your land, for the Lord has refused to permit me to go with you.”
NUM 22:14 So the princes of Moab departed and went back to Balak and said, “Balaam refused to come with us.”
NUM 22:15 Balak again sent princes, more numerous and more distinguished than the first.
NUM 22:16 And they came to Balaam and said to him, “Thus says Balak son of Zippor: ‘Please do not let anything hinder you from coming to me.
NUM 22:17 For I will honor you greatly, and whatever you tell me I will do. So come, put a curse on this nation for me.’”
NUM 22:18 Balaam replied to the servants of Balak, “Even if Balak would give me his palace full of silver and gold, I could not transgress the commandment of the Lord my God to do less or more.
NUM 22:19 Now therefore, please stay the night here also, that I may know what more the Lord might say to me.”
NUM 22:20 God came to Balaam that night, and said to him, “If the men have come to call you, get up and go with them; but the word that I will say to you, that you must do.”
NUM 22:21 So Balaam got up in the morning, saddled his donkey, and went with the princes of Moab.
NUM 22:22 Then God’s anger was kindled because he went, and the angel of the Lord stood in the road to oppose him. Now he was riding on his donkey and his two servants were with him.
NUM 22:23 And the donkey saw the angel of the Lord standing in the road with his sword drawn in his hand, so the donkey turned aside from the road and went into the field. But Balaam beat the donkey, to make her turn back to the road.
NUM 22:24 Then the angel of the Lord stood in a path among the vineyards, where there was a wall on either side.
NUM 22:25 And when the donkey saw the angel of the Lord, she pressed herself into the wall, and crushed Balaam’s foot against the wall. So he beat her again.
NUM 22:26 Then the angel of the Lord went farther, and stood in a narrow place, where there was no way to turn either to the right or to the left.
NUM 22:27 When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord, she crouched down under Balaam. Then Balaam was angry, and he beat his donkey with a staff.
NUM 22:28 Then the Lord opened the mouth of the donkey, and she said to Balaam, “What have I done to you that you have beaten me these three times?”
NUM 22:29 And Balaam said to the donkey, “You have made me look stupid; I wish there were a sword in my hand, for I would kill you right now.”
NUM 22:30 The donkey said to Balaam, “Am not I your donkey that you have ridden ever since I was yours until this day? Have I ever attempted to treat you this way?” And he said, “No.”
NUM 22:31 Then the Lord opened Balaam’s eyes, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the way with his sword drawn in his hand; so he bowed his head and threw himself down with his face to the ground.
NUM 22:32 The angel of the Lord said to him, “Why have you beaten your donkey these three times? Look, I came out to oppose you because what you are doing is perverse before me.
NUM 22:33 The donkey saw me and turned from me these three times. If she had not turned from me, I would have killed you but saved her alive.”
NUM 22:34 Balaam said to the angel of the Lord, “I have sinned, for I did not know that you stood against me in the road. So now, if it is evil in your sight, I will go back home.”
NUM 22:35 But the angel of the Lord said to Balaam, “Go with the men, but you may only speak the word that I will speak to you.” So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.
NUM 22:36 When Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to meet him at a city of Moab which was on the border of the Arnon at the boundary of his territory.
NUM 22:37 Balak said to Balaam, “Did I not send again and again to you to summon you? Why did you not come to me? Am I not able to honor you?”
NUM 22:38 Balaam said to Balak, “Look, I have come to you. Now, am I able to speak just anything? I must speak only the word that God puts in my mouth.”
NUM 22:39 So Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-huzoth.
NUM 22:40 And Balak sacrificed bulls and sheep, and sent some to Balaam, and to the princes who were with him.
NUM 22:41 Then on the next morning Balak took Balaam, and brought him up to Bamoth Baal. From there he saw the extent of the nation.
NUM 23:1 Balaam said to Balak, “Build me seven altars here, and prepare for me here seven bulls and seven rams.”
NUM 23:2 So Balak did just as Balaam had said. Balak and Balaam then offered on each altar a bull and a ram.
NUM 23:3 Balaam said to Balak, “Station yourself by your burnt offering, and I will go off; perhaps the Lord will come to meet me, and whatever he reveals to me I will tell you.” Then he went to a deserted height.
NUM 23:4 Then God met Balaam, who said to him, “I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered on each altar a bull and a ram.”
NUM 23:5 Then the Lord put a message in Balaam’s mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and speak what I tell you.”
NUM 23:6 So he returned to him, and he was still standing by his burnt offering, he and all the princes of Moab.
NUM 23:7 Then Balaam uttered his oracle, saying, “Balak, the king of Moab, brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, ‘Come, pronounce a curse on Jacob for me; come, denounce Israel.’
NUM 23:8 How can I curse one whom God has not cursed, or how can I denounce one whom the Lord has not denounced?
NUM 23:9 For from the top of the rocks I see them; from the hills I watch them. Indeed, a nation that lives alone, and it will not be reckoned among the nations.
NUM 23:10 Who can count the dust of Jacob, Or number the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the upright, and let the end of my life be like theirs.”
NUM 23:11 Then Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? I brought you to curse my enemies, but on the contrary you have only blessed them!”
NUM 23:12 Balaam replied, “Must I not be careful to speak what the Lord has put in my mouth?”
NUM 23:13 Balak said to him, “Please come with me to another place from which you can observe them. You will see only a part of them, but you will not see all of them. Curse them for me from there.”
NUM 23:14 So Balak brought Balaam to the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, where he built seven altars and offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
NUM 23:15 And Balaam said to Balak, “Station yourself here by your burnt offering, while I meet the Lord there.
NUM 23:16 Then the Lord met Balaam and put a message in his mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and speak what I tell you.”
NUM 23:17 When Balaam came to him, he was still standing by his burnt offering, along with the princes of Moab. And Balak said to him, “What has the Lord spoken?”
NUM 23:18 Balaam uttered his oracle, and said, “Rise up, Balak, and hear; Listen to me, son of Zippor:
NUM 23:19 God is not a man, that he should lie, nor a human being, that he should change his mind. Has he said, and will he not do it? Or has he spoken, and will he not make it happen?
NUM 23:20 Indeed, I have received a command to bless; he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.
NUM 23:21 He has not looked on iniquity in Jacob, nor has he seen trouble in Israel. The Lord their God is with them; his acclamation as king is among them.
NUM 23:22 God brought them out of Egypt. They have, as it were, the strength of a wild bull.
NUM 23:23 For there is no spell against Jacob, nor is there any divination against Israel. At this time it must be said of Jacob and of Israel, ‘Look at what God has done!’
NUM 23:24 Indeed, the people will rise up like a lioness, and like a lion raises himself up; they will not lie down until they eat their prey, and drink the blood of the slain.”
NUM 23:25 Balak said to Balaam, “Neither curse them at all nor bless them at all!”
NUM 23:26 But Balaam replied to Balak, “Did I not tell you, ‘All that the Lord speaks, I must do’?”
NUM 23:27 Balak said to Balaam, “Come, please; I will take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God to let you curse them for me from there.”
NUM 23:28 So Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, that looks toward the wilderness.
NUM 23:29 Then Balaam said to Balak, “Build seven altars here for me, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams.”
NUM 23:30 So Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
NUM 24:1 When Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he did not go as at the other times to seek for omens, but he set his face toward the wilderness.
NUM 24:2 When Balaam lifted up his eyes, he saw Israel camped tribe by tribe; and the Spirit of God came upon him.
NUM 24:3 Then he uttered this oracle: “The oracle of Balaam son of Beor; the oracle of the man whose eyes are open;
NUM 24:4 the oracle of the one who hears the words of God, who sees a vision from the Almighty, although falling flat on the ground with eyes open:
NUM 24:5 ‘How beautiful are your tents, O Jacob, and your dwelling places, O Israel!
NUM 24:6 They are like valleys stretched forth, like gardens by the river’s side, like aloes that the Lord has planted, and like cedar trees beside the waters.
NUM 24:7 He will pour the water out of his buckets, and their descendants will be like abundant water; their king will be greater than Agag, and their kingdom will be exalted.
NUM 24:8 God brought them out of Egypt. They have, as it were, the strength of a young bull; they will devour hostile people and will break their bones and will pierce them through with arrows.
NUM 24:9 They crouch and lie down like a lion, and as a lioness, who can stir him? Blessed is the one who blesses you, and cursed is the one who curses you!’”
NUM 24:10 Then Balak became very angry at Balaam, and he struck his hands together. Balak said to Balaam, “I called you to curse my enemies, and look, you have done nothing but bless them these three times!
NUM 24:11 So now, go back where you came from! I said that I would greatly honor you; but now the Lord has stood in the way of your honor.”
NUM 24:12 Balaam said to Balak, “Did I not also tell your messengers whom you sent to me,
NUM 24:13 ‘If Balak would give me his palace full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the Lord to do either good or evil of my own will, but whatever the Lord tells me I must speak’?
NUM 24:14 And now, I am about to go back to my own people. Come now, and I will advise you as to what this people will do to your people in the future.”
NUM 24:15 Then he uttered this oracle: “The oracle of Balaam son of Beor; the oracle of the man whose eyes are open;
NUM 24:16 the oracle of the one who hears the words of God, and who knows the knowledge of the Most High, who sees a vision from the Almighty, although falling flat on the ground with eyes open:
NUM 24:17 ‘I see him, but not now; I behold him, but not close at hand. A star will march forth out of Jacob, and a scepter will rise out of Israel. He will crush the skulls of Moab, and the heads of all the sons of Sheth.
NUM 24:18 Edom will be a possession, Seir, his enemies, will also be a possession; but Israel will act valiantly.
NUM 24:19 A ruler will be established from Jacob; he will destroy the remains of the city.’”
NUM 24:20 Then Balaam looked on Amalek and delivered this oracle: “Amalek was the first of the nations, but his end will be that he will perish.”
NUM 24:21 Then he looked on the Kenites and uttered this oracle: “Your dwelling place seems strong, and your nest is set on a rocky cliff.
NUM 24:22 Nevertheless the Kenite will be consumed. How long will Asshur take you away captive?”
NUM 24:23 Then he uttered this oracle: “O, who will survive when God does this!
NUM 24:24 Ships will come from the coast of Kittim, and will afflict Asshur, and will afflict Eber, and he will also perish forever.”
NUM 24:25 Balaam got up and departed and returned to his home, and Balak also went his way.
NUM 25:1 When Israel lived in Shittim, the people began to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moab.
NUM 25:2 These women invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods; then the people ate and bowed down to their gods.
NUM 25:3 When Israel joined themselves to Baal-peor, the anger of the Lord flared up against Israel.
NUM 25:4 The Lord said to Moses, “Arrest all the leaders of the people, and hang them up before the Lord in broad daylight, so that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel.”
NUM 25:5 So Moses said to the judges of Israel, “Each of you must execute those of his men who were joined to Baal-peor.”
NUM 25:6 Just then one of the Israelites came and brought to his brothers a Midianite woman in the plain view of Moses and of the whole community of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
NUM 25:7 When Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he got up from among the assembly, took a javelin in his hand,
NUM 25:8 and went after the Israelite man into the tent and thrust through the Israelite man and into the woman’s abdomen. So the plague was stopped from the Israelites.
NUM 25:9 Those that died in the plague were 24,000.
NUM 25:10 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 25:11 “Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my anger away from the Israelites, when he manifested such zeal for my sake among them, so that I did not consume the Israelites in my zeal.
NUM 25:12 Therefore, announce: ‘I am going to give to him my covenant of peace.
NUM 25:13 So it will be to him and his descendants after him a covenant of a permanent priesthood, because he has been zealous for his God, and has made atonement for the Israelites.’”
NUM 25:14 Now the name of the Israelite who was stabbed – the one who was stabbed with the Midianite woman – was Zimri son of Salu, a leader of a clan of the Simeonites.
NUM 25:15 The name of the Midianite woman who was killed was Cozbi daughter of Zur. He was a leader over the people of a clan of Midian.
NUM 25:16 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 25:17 “Bring trouble to the Midianites, and destroy them,
NUM 25:18 because they bring trouble to you by their treachery with which they have deceived you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, who was killed on the day of the plague that happened as a result of Peor.”
NUM 26:1 After the plague the Lord said to Moses and to Eleazar son of Aaron the priest,
NUM 26:2 “Take a census of the whole community of Israelites, from twenty years old and upward, by their clans, everyone who can serve in the army of Israel.”
NUM 26:3 So Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab, by the Jordan River across from Jericho. They said,
NUM 26:4 “Number the people from twenty years old and upward, just as the Lord commanded Moses and the Israelites who went out from the land of Egypt.”
NUM 26:5 Reuben was the firstborn of Israel. The Reubenites: from Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; from Pallu, the family of the Palluites;
NUM 26:6 from Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; from Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
NUM 26:7 These were the families of the Reubenites; and those numbered of them were 43,730.
NUM 26:8 Pallu’s descendant was Eliab.
NUM 26:9 Eliab’s descendants were Nemuel, Dathan, and Abiram. It was Dathan and Abiram who as leaders of the community rebelled against Moses and Aaron with the followers of Korah when they rebelled against the Lord.
NUM 26:10 The earth opened its mouth and swallowed them and Korah at the time that company died, when the fire consumed 250 men. So they became a warning.
NUM 26:11 But the descendants of Korah did not die.
NUM 26:12 The Simeonites by their families: from Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; from Jamin, the family of the Jaminites; from Jakin, the family of the Jakinites;
NUM 26:13 from Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; and from Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
NUM 26:14 These were the families of the Simeonites, 22,200.
NUM 26:15 The Gadites by their families: from Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; from Haggi, the family of the Haggites; from Shuni, the family of the Shunites;
NUM 26:16 from Ozni, the family of the Oznites; from Eri, the family of the Erites;
NUM 26:17 from Arod, the family of the Arodites, and from Areli, the family of the Arelites.
NUM 26:18 These were the families of the Gadites according to those numbered of them, 40,500.
NUM 26:19 The descendants of Judah were Er and Onan, but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
NUM 26:20 And the Judahites by their families were: from Shelah, the family of the Shelahites; from Perez, the family of the Perezites; and from Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.
NUM 26:21 And the Perezites were: from Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; from Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
NUM 26:22 These were the families of Judah according to those numbered of them, 76,500.
NUM 26:23 The Issacharites by their families: from Tola, the family of the Tolaites; from Puah, the family of the Puites;
NUM 26:24 from Jashub, the family of the Jashubites; and from Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
NUM 26:25 These were the families of Issachar, according to those numbered of them, 64,300.
NUM 26:26 The Zebulunites by their families: from Sered, the family of the Sardites; from Elon, the family of the Elonites; from Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
NUM 26:27 These were the families of the Zebulunites, according to those numbered of them, 60,500.
NUM 26:28 The descendants of Joseph by their families: Manasseh and Ephraim.
NUM 26:29 The Manassehites: from Machir, the family of the Machirites (now Machir became the father of Gilead); from Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.
NUM 26:30 These were the Gileadites: from Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; from Helek, the family of the Helekites;
NUM 26:31 from Asriel, the family of the Asrielites; from Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;
NUM 26:32 from Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites; from Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
NUM 26:33 Now Zelophehad son of Hepher had no sons, but only daughters; and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
NUM 26:34 These were the families of Manasseh; those numbered of them were 52,700.
NUM 26:35 These are the Ephraimites by their families: from Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; from Beker, the family of the Bekerites; from Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
NUM 26:36 Now these were the Shuthelahites: from Eran, the family of the Eranites.
NUM 26:37 These were the families of the Ephraimites, according to those numbered of them, 32,500. These were the descendants of Joseph by their families.
NUM 26:38 The Benjaminites by their families: from Bela, the family of the Belaites; from Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; from Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;
NUM 26:39 from Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites; from Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
NUM 26:40 The descendants of Bela were Ard and Naaman. From Ard, the family of the Ardites; from Naaman, the family of the Naamanites.
NUM 26:41 These are the Benjaminites, according to their families, and according to those numbered of them, 45,600.
NUM 26:42 These are the Danites by their families: from Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These were the families of Dan, according to their families.
NUM 26:43 All the families of the Shuhahites according to those numbered of them were 64,400.
NUM 26:44 The Asherites by their families: from Imnah, the family of the Imnahites; from Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites; from Beriah, the family of the Beriahites.
NUM 26:45 From the Beriahites: from Heber, the family of the Heberites; from Malkiel, the family of the Malkielites.
NUM 26:46 Now the name of the daughter of Asher was Serah.
NUM 26:47 These are the families of the Asherites, according to those numbered of them, 53,400.
NUM 26:48 The Naphtalites by their families: from Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; from Guni, the family of the Gunites;
NUM 26:49 from Jezer, the family of the Jezerites; from Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
NUM 26:50 These were the families of Naphtali according to their families; and those numbered of them were 45,400.
NUM 26:51 These were those numbered of the Israelites, 601,730.
NUM 26:52 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 26:53 “To these the land must be divided as an inheritance according to the number of the names.
NUM 26:54 To a larger group you will give a larger inheritance, and to a smaller group you will give a smaller inheritance. To each one its inheritance must be given according to the number of people in it.
NUM 26:55 The land must be divided by lot; and they will inherit in accordance with the names of their ancestral tribes.
NUM 26:56 Their inheritance must be apportioned by lot among the larger and smaller groups.
NUM 26:57 And these are the Levites who were numbered according to their families: from Gershon, the family of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; from Merari, the family of the Merarites.
NUM 26:58 These are the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. Kohath became the father of Amram.
NUM 26:59 Now the name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed, daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt. And to Amram she bore Aaron, Moses, and Miriam their sister.
NUM 26:60 And to Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
NUM 26:61 But Nadab and Abihu died when they offered strange fire before the Lord.
NUM 26:62 Those of them who were numbered were 23,000, all males from a month old and upward, for they were not numbered among the Israelites; no inheritance was given to them among the Israelites.
NUM 26:63 These are those who were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the Israelites in the plains of Moab along the Jordan River opposite Jericho.
NUM 26:64 But there was not a man among these who had been among those numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest when they numbered the Israelites in the wilderness of Sinai.
NUM 26:65 For the Lord had said of them, “They will surely die in the wilderness.” And there was not left a single man of them, except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun.
NUM 27:1 Then the daughters of Zelophehad son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh of the families of Manasseh, the son Joseph came forward. Now these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
NUM 27:2 And they stood before Moses and Eleazar the priest and the leaders of the whole assembly at the entrance to the tent of meeting and said,
NUM 27:3 “Our father died in the wilderness, although he was not part of the company of those that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the company of Korah; but he died for his own sin, and he had no sons.
NUM 27:4 Why should the name of our father be lost from among his family because he had no son? Give us a possession among the relatives of our father.”
NUM 27:5 So Moses brought their case before the Lord.
NUM 27:6 The Lord said to Moses:
NUM 27:7 “The daughters of Zelophehad have a valid claim. You must indeed give them possession of an inheritance among their father’s relatives, and you must transfer the inheritance of their father to them.
NUM 27:8 And you must tell the Israelites, ‘If a man dies and has no son, then you must transfer his inheritance to his daughter;
NUM 27:9 and if he has no daughter, then you are to give his inheritance to his brothers;
NUM 27:10 and if he has no brothers, then you are to give his inheritance to his father’s brothers;
NUM 27:11 and if his father has no brothers, then you are to give his inheritance to his relative nearest to him from his family, and he will possess it. This will be for the Israelites a legal requirement, as the Lord commanded Moses.’”
NUM 27:12 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go up this mountain of the Abarim range, and see the land I have given to the Israelites.
NUM 27:13 When you have seen it, you will be gathered to your ancestors, as Aaron your brother was gathered to his ancestors.
NUM 27:14 For in the wilderness of Zin when the community rebelled against me, you rebelled against my command to show me as holy before their eyes over the water – the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.”
NUM 27:15 Then Moses spoke to the Lord:
NUM 27:16 “Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all humankind, appoint a man over the community,
NUM 27:17 who will go out before them, and who will come in before them, and who will lead them out, and who will bring them in, so that the community of the Lord may not be like sheep that have no shepherd.”
NUM 27:18 The Lord replied to Moses, “Take Joshua son of Nun, a man in whom is such a spirit, and lay your hand on him;
NUM 27:19 set him before Eleazar the priest and before the whole community, and commission him publicly.
NUM 27:20 Then you must delegate some of your authority to him, so that the whole community of the Israelites will be obedient.
NUM 27:21 And he will stand before Eleazar the priest, who will seek counsel for him before the Lord by the decision of the Urim. At his command they will go out, and at his command they will come in, he and all the Israelites with him, the whole community.”
NUM 27:22 So Moses did as the Lord commanded him; he took Joshua and set him before Eleazar the priest and before the whole community.
NUM 27:23 He laid his hands on him and commissioned him, just as the Lord commanded, by the authority of Moses.
NUM 28:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 28:2 “Command the Israelites: ‘With regard to my offering, be sure to offer my food for my offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to me at its appointed time.’
NUM 28:3 You will say to them, ‘This is the offering made by fire which you must offer to the Lord: two unblemished lambs one year old each day for a continual burnt offering.
NUM 28:4 The first lamb you must offer in the morning, and the second lamb you must offer in the late afternoon,
NUM 28:5 with one-tenth of an ephah of finely ground flour as a grain offering mixed with one quarter of a hin of pressed olive oil.
NUM 28:6 It is a continual burnt offering that was instituted on Mount Sinai as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the Lord.
NUM 28:7 “‘And its drink offering must be one quarter of a hin for each lamb. You must pour out the strong drink as a drink offering to the Lord in the holy place.
NUM 28:8 And the second lamb you must offer in the late afternoon; just as you offered the grain offering and drink offering in the morning, you must offer it as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to the Lord.
NUM 28:9 “‘On the Sabbath day, you must offer two unblemished lambs a year old, and two-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour as a grain offering, mixed with olive oil, along with its drink offering.
NUM 28:10 This is the burnt offering for every Sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering and its drink offering.
NUM 28:11 “‘On the first day of each month you must offer as a burnt offering to the Lord two young bulls, one ram, and seven unblemished lambs a year old,
NUM 28:12 with three-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering for each bull, and two-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering for the ram,
NUM 28:13 and one-tenth of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering for each lamb, as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the Lord.
NUM 28:14 For their drink offerings, include half a hin of wine with each bull, one-third of a hin for the ram, and one-fourth of a hin for each lamb. This is the burnt offering for each month throughout the months of the year.
NUM 28:15 And one male goat must be offered to the Lord as a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering and its drink offering.
NUM 28:16 “‘On the fourteenth day of the first month is the Lord’s Passover.
NUM 28:17 And on the fifteenth day of this month is the festival. For seven days bread made without yeast must be eaten.
NUM 28:18 And on the first day there is to be a holy assembly; you must do no ordinary work on it.
NUM 28:19 “‘But you must offer to the Lord an offering made by fire, a burnt offering of two young bulls, one ram, and seven lambs one year old; they must all be unblemished.
NUM 28:20 And their grain offering is to be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil. For each bull you must offer three-tenths of an ephah, and two-tenths for the ram.
NUM 28:21 For each of the seven lambs you are to offer one-tenth of an ephah,
NUM 28:22 as well as one goat for a purification offering, to make atonement for you.
NUM 28:23 You must offer these in addition to the burnt offering in the morning which is for a continual burnt offering.
NUM 28:24 In this manner you must offer daily throughout the seven days the food of the sacrifice made by fire as a sweet aroma to the Lord. It is to be offered in addition to the continual burnt offering and its drink offering.
NUM 28:25 On the seventh day you are to have a holy assembly, you must do no regular work.
NUM 28:26 “‘Also, on the day of the first fruits, when you bring a new grain offering to the Lord during your Feast of Weeks, you are to have a holy assembly. You must do no ordinary work.
NUM 28:27 But you must offer as the burnt offering, as a sweet aroma to the Lord, two young bulls, one ram, seven lambs one year old,
NUM 28:28 with their grain offering of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil: three-tenths of an ephah for each bull, two-tenths for the one ram,
NUM 28:29 with one-tenth for each of the seven lambs,
NUM 28:30 as well as one male goat to make an atonement for you.
NUM 28:31 You are to offer them with their drink offerings in addition to the continual burnt offering and its grain offering – they must be unblemished.
NUM 29:1 “‘On the first day of the seventh month, you are to hold a holy assembly. You must not do your ordinary work, for it is a day of blowing trumpets for you.
NUM 29:2 You must offer a burnt offering as a sweet aroma to the Lord: one young bull, one ram, and seven lambs one year old without blemish.
NUM 29:3 “‘Their grain offering is to be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil, three-tenths of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths of an ephah for the ram,
NUM 29:4 and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs,
NUM 29:5 with one male goat for a purification offering to make an atonement for you;
NUM 29:6 this is in addition to the monthly burnt offering and its grain offering, and the daily burnt offering with its grain offering and their drink offerings as prescribed, as a sweet aroma, a sacrifice made by fire to the Lord.
NUM 29:7 “‘On the tenth day of this seventh month you are to have a holy assembly. You must humble yourselves; you must not do any work on it.
NUM 29:8 But you must offer a burnt offering as a pleasing aroma to the Lord, one young bull, one ram, and seven lambs one year old, all of them without blemish.
NUM 29:9 Their grain offering must be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil, three-tenths of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths for the ram,
NUM 29:10 and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs,
NUM 29:11 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the purification offering for atonement and the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and their drink offerings.
NUM 29:12 “‘On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you are to have a holy assembly; you must do no ordinary work, and you must keep a festival to the Lord for seven days.
NUM 29:13 You must offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the Lord: thirteen young bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs each one year old, all of them without blemish.
NUM 29:14 Their grain offering must be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil, three-tenths of an ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths of an ephah for each of the two rams,
NUM 29:15 and one-tenth for each of the fourteen lambs,
NUM 29:16 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:17 “‘On the second day you must offer twelve young bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish,
NUM 29:18 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:19 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and their drink offerings.
NUM 29:20 “‘On the third day you must offer eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish,
NUM 29:21 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:22 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:23 “‘On the fourth day you must offer ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish,
NUM 29:24 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:25 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:26 “‘On the fifth day you must offer nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish,
NUM 29:27 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:28 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:29 “‘On the sixth day you must offer eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish,
NUM 29:30 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:31 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:32 “‘On the seventh day you must offer seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish,
NUM 29:33 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:34 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:35 “‘On the eighth day you are to have a holy assembly; you must do no ordinary work on it.
NUM 29:36 But you must offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to the Lord, one bull, one ram, seven lambs one year old, all of them without blemish,
NUM 29:37 and with their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed,
NUM 29:38 along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering.
NUM 29:39 “‘These things you must present to the Lord at your appointed times, in addition to your vows and your freewill offerings, as your burnt offerings, your grain offerings, your drink offerings, and your peace offerings.’”
NUM 29:40 So Moses told the Israelites everything, just as the Lord had commanded him.
NUM 30:1 Moses told the leaders of the tribes concerning the Israelites, “This is what the Lord has commanded:
NUM 30:2 If a man makes a vow to the Lord or takes an oath of binding obligation on himself, he must not break his word, but must do whatever he has promised.
NUM 30:3 “If a young woman who is still living in her father’s house makes a vow to the Lord or places herself under an obligation,
NUM 30:4 and her father hears of her vow or the obligation to which she has pledged herself, and her father remains silent about her, then all her vows will stand, and every obligation to which she has pledged herself will stand.
NUM 30:5 But if her father overrules her when he hears about it, then none of her vows or her obligations which she has pledged for herself will stand. And the Lord will release her from it, because her father overruled her.
NUM 30:6 “And if she marries a husband while under a vow, or she uttered anything impulsively by which she has pledged herself,
NUM 30:7 and her husband hears about it, but remains silent about her when he hears about it, then her vows will stand and her obligations which she has pledged for herself will stand.
NUM 30:8 But if when her husband hears it he overrules her, then he will nullify the vow she has taken, and whatever she uttered impulsively which she has pledged for herself. And the Lord will release her from it.
NUM 30:9 “But every vow of a widow or of a divorced woman which she has pledged for herself will remain intact.
NUM 30:10 If she made the vow in her husband’s house or put herself under obligation with an oath,
NUM 30:11 and her husband heard about it, but remained silent about her, and did not overrule her, then all her vows will stand, and every obligation which she pledged for herself will stand.
NUM 30:12 But if her husband clearly nullifies them when he hears them, then whatever she says by way of vows or obligations will not stand. Her husband has made them void, and the Lord will release her from them.
NUM 30:13 “Any vow or sworn obligation that would bring affliction to her, her husband can confirm or nullify.
NUM 30:14 But if her husband remains completely silent about her from day to day, he thus confirms all her vows or all her obligations which she is under; he confirms them because he remained silent about when he heard them.
NUM 30:15 But if he should nullify them after he has heard them, then he will bear her iniquity.”
NUM 30:16 These are the statutes that the Lord commanded Moses, relating to a man and his wife, and a father and his young daughter who is still living in her father’s house.
NUM 31:1 The Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 31:2 “Exact vengeance for the Israelites on the Midianites – after that you will be gathered to your people.”
NUM 31:3 So Moses spoke to the people: “Arm men from among you for the war, to attack the Midianites and to execute the Lord’s vengeance on Midian.
NUM 31:4 You must send to the battle a thousand men from every tribe throughout all the tribes of Israel.”
NUM 31:5 So a thousand from every tribe, twelve thousand armed for battle in all, were provided out of the thousands of Israel.
NUM 31:6 So Moses sent them to the war, one thousand from every tribe, with Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest, who was in charge of the holy articles and the signal trumpets.
NUM 31:7 They fought against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses, and they killed every male.
NUM 31:8 They killed the kings of Midian in addition to those slain – Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba – five Midianite kings. They also killed Balaam son of Beor with the sword.
NUM 31:9 The Israelites took the women of Midian captives along with their little ones, and took all their herds, all their flocks, and all their goods as plunder.
NUM 31:10 They burned all their towns where they lived and all their encampments.
NUM 31:11 They took all the plunder and all the spoils, both people and animals.
NUM 31:12 They brought the captives and the spoils and the plunder to Moses, to Eleazar the priest, and to the Israelite community, to the camp on the plains of Moab, along the Jordan River across from Jericho.
NUM 31:13 Moses, Eleazar the priest, and all the leaders of the community went out to meet them outside the camp.
NUM 31:14 But Moses was furious with the officers of the army, the commanders over thousands and commanders over hundreds, who had come from service in the war.
NUM 31:15 Moses said to them, “Have you allowed all the women to live?
NUM 31:16 Look, these people through the counsel of Balaam caused the Israelites to act treacherously against the Lord in the matter of Peor – which resulted in the plague among the community of the Lord!
NUM 31:17 Now therefore kill every boy, and kill every woman who has had sexual intercourse with a man.
NUM 31:18 But all the young women who have not had sexual intercourse with a man will be yours.
NUM 31:19 “Any of you who has killed anyone or touched any of the dead, remain outside the camp for seven days; purify yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.
NUM 31:20 You must purify each garment and everything that is made of skin, everything made of goat’s hair, and everything made of wood.”
NUM 31:21 Then Eleazar the priest said to the men of war who had gone into the battle, “This is the ordinance of the law that the Lord commanded Moses:
NUM 31:22 ‘Only the gold, the silver, the bronze, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
NUM 31:23 everything that may stand the fire, you are to pass through the fire, and it will be ceremonially clean, but it must still be purified with the water of purification. Anything that cannot withstand the fire you must pass through the water.
NUM 31:24 You must wash your clothes on the seventh day, and you will be ceremonially clean, and afterward you may enter the camp.’”
NUM 31:25 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 31:26 “You and Eleazar the priest, and all the family leaders of the community, take the sum of the plunder that was captured, both people and animals.
NUM 31:27 Divide the plunder into two parts, one for those who took part in the war – who went out to battle – and the other for all the community.
NUM 31:28 “You must exact a tribute for the Lord from the fighting men who went out to battle: one life out of five hundred, from the people, the cattle, and from the donkeys and the sheep.
NUM 31:29 You are to take it from their half-share and give it to Eleazar the priest for a raised offering to the Lord.
NUM 31:30 From the Israelites’ half-share you are to take one portion out of fifty of the people, the cattle, the donkeys, and the sheep – from every kind of animal – and you are to give them to the Levites, who are responsible for the care of the Lord’s tabernacle.”
NUM 31:31 So Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses.
NUM 31:32 The spoil that remained of the plunder which the fighting men had gathered was 675,000 sheep,
NUM 31:33 72,000 cattle,
NUM 31:34 61,000 donkeys,
NUM 31:35 and 32,000 young women who had never had sexual intercourse with a man.
NUM 31:36 The half-portion of those who went to war numbered 337,500 sheep;
NUM 31:37 the Lord’s tribute from the sheep was 675.
NUM 31:38 The cattle numbered 36,000; the Lord’s tribute was 72.
NUM 31:39 The donkeys were 30,500, of which the Lord’s tribute was 61.
NUM 31:40 The people were 16,000, of which the Lord’s tribute was 32 people.
NUM 31:41 So Moses gave the tribute, which was the Lord’s raised offering, to Eleazar the priest, as the Lord commanded Moses.
NUM 31:42 From the Israelites’ half-share that Moses had separated from the fighting men,
NUM 31:43 there were 337,500 sheep from the portion belonging to the community,
NUM 31:44 36,000 cattle,
NUM 31:45 30,500 donkeys,
NUM 31:46 and 16,000 people.
NUM 31:47 From the Israelites’ share Moses took one of every fifty people and animals and gave them to the Levites who were responsible for the care of the Lord’s tabernacle, just as the Lord commanded Moses.
NUM 31:48 Then the officers who were over the thousands of the army, the commanders over thousands and the commanders over hundreds, approached Moses
NUM 31:49 and said to him, “Your servants have taken a count of the men who were in the battle, who were under our authority, and not one is missing.
NUM 31:50 So we have brought as an offering for the Lord what each man found: gold ornaments, armlets, bracelets, signet rings, earrings, and necklaces, to make atonement for ourselves before the Lord.”
NUM 31:51 Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, all of it in the form of ornaments.
NUM 31:52 All the gold of the offering they offered up to the Lord from the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds weighed 16,750 shekels.
NUM 31:53 Each soldier had taken plunder for himself.
NUM 31:54 So Moses and Eleazar the priest received the gold from the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds and brought it into the tent of meeting as a memorial for the Israelites before the Lord.
NUM 32:1 Now the Reubenites and the Gadites possessed a very large number of cattle. When they saw that the lands of Jazer and Gilead were ideal for cattle,
NUM 32:2 the Gadites and the Reubenites came and addressed Moses, Eleazar the priest, and the leaders of the community. They said,
NUM 32:3 “Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo, and Beon,
NUM 32:4 the land that the Lord subdued before the community of Israel, is ideal for cattle, and your servants have cattle.”
NUM 32:5 So they said, “If we have found favor in your sight, let this land be given to your servants for our inheritance. Do not have us cross the Jordan River.”
NUM 32:6 Moses said to the Gadites and the Reubenites, “Must your brothers go to war while you remain here?
NUM 32:7 Why do you frustrate the intent of the Israelites to cross over into the land which the Lord has given them?
NUM 32:8 Your fathers did the same thing when I sent them from Kadesh Barnea to see the land.
NUM 32:9 When they went up to the Eshcol Valley and saw the land, they frustrated the intent of the Israelites so that they did not enter the land that the Lord had given them.
NUM 32:10 So the anger of the Lord was kindled that day, and he swore,
NUM 32:11 ‘Because they have not followed me wholeheartedly, not one of the men twenty years old and upward who came from Egypt will see the land that I swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
NUM 32:12 except Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, and Joshua son of Nun, for they followed the Lord wholeheartedly.’
NUM 32:13 So the Lord’s anger was kindled against the Israelites, and he made them wander in the wilderness for forty years, until all that generation that had done wickedly before the Lord was finished.
NUM 32:14 Now look, you are standing in your fathers’ place, a brood of sinners, to increase still further the fierce wrath of the Lord against the Israelites.
NUM 32:15 For if you turn away from following him, he will once again abandon them in the wilderness, and you will be the reason for their destruction.”
NUM 32:16 Then they came very close to him and said, “We will build sheep folds here for our flocks and cities for our families,
NUM 32:17 but we will maintain ourselves in armed readiness and go before the Israelites until whenever we have brought them to their place. Our descendants will be living in fortified towns as a protection against the inhabitants of the land.
NUM 32:18 We will not return to our homes until every Israelite has his inheritance.
NUM 32:19 For we will not accept any inheritance on the other side of the Jordan River and beyond, because our inheritance has come to us on this eastern side of the Jordan.”
NUM 32:20 Then Moses replied, “If you will do this thing, and if you will arm yourselves for battle before the Lord,
NUM 32:21 and if all your armed men cross the Jordan before the Lord until he drives out his enemies from his presence
NUM 32:22 and the land is subdued before the Lord, then afterward you may return and be free of your obligation to the Lord and to Israel. This land will then be your possession in the Lord’s sight.
NUM 32:23 “But if you do not do this, then look, you will have sinned against the Lord. And know that your sin will find you out.
NUM 32:24 So build cities for your descendants and pens for your sheep, but do what you have said you would do.”
NUM 32:25 So the Gadites and the Reubenites replied to Moses, “Your servants will do as my lord commands.
NUM 32:26 Our children, our wives, our flocks, and all our livestock will be there in the cities of Gilead,
NUM 32:27 but your servants will cross over, every man armed for war, to do battle in the Lord’s presence, just as my lord says.”
NUM 32:28 So Moses gave orders about them to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua son of Nun, and to the heads of the families of the Israelite tribes.
NUM 32:29 Moses said to them: “If the Gadites and the Reubenites cross the Jordan with you, each one equipped for battle in the Lord’s presence, and you conquer the land, then you must allot them the territory of Gilead as their possession.
NUM 32:30 But if they do not cross over with you armed, they must receive possessions among you in Canaan.”
NUM 32:31 Then the Gadites and the Reubenites answered, “Your servants will do what the Lord has spoken.
NUM 32:32 We will cross armed in the Lord’s presence into the land of Canaan, and then the possession of our inheritance that we inherit will be ours on this side of the Jordan River.”
NUM 32:33 So Moses gave to the Gadites, the Reubenites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph the realm of King Sihon of the Amorites, and the realm of King Og of Bashan, the entire land with its cities and the territory surrounding them.
NUM 32:34 The Gadites rebuilt Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer,
NUM 32:35 Atroth Shophan, Jazer, Jogbehah,
NUM 32:36 Beth Nimrah, and Beth Haran as fortified cities, and constructed pens for their flocks.
NUM 32:37 The Reubenites rebuilt Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim,
NUM 32:38 Nebo, Baal Meon (with a change of name), and Sibmah. They renamed the cities they built.
NUM 32:39 The descendants of Machir son of Manasseh went to Gilead, took it, and dispossessed the Amorites who were in it.
NUM 32:40 So Moses gave Gilead to Machir, son of Manasseh, and he lived there.
NUM 32:41 Now Jair son of Manasseh went and captured their small towns and named them Havvoth Jair.
NUM 32:42 Then Nobah went and captured Kenath and its villages and called it Nobah after his own name.
NUM 33:1 These are the journeys of the Israelites, who went out of the land of Egypt by their divisions under the authority of Moses and Aaron.
NUM 33:2 Moses recorded their departures according to their journeys, by the commandment of the Lord; now these are their journeys according to their departures.
NUM 33:3 They departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the day after the Passover the Israelites went out defiantly in plain sight of all the Egyptians.
NUM 33:4 Now the Egyptians were burying all their firstborn, whom the Lord had killed among them; the Lord also executed judgments on their gods.
NUM 33:5 The Israelites traveled from Rameses and camped in Succoth.
NUM 33:6 They traveled from Succoth, and camped in Etham, which is on the edge of the wilderness.
NUM 33:7 They traveled from Etham, and turned again to Pi-hahiroth, which is before Baal-Zephon; and they camped before Migdal.
NUM 33:8 They traveled from Pi-hahiroth, and passed through the middle of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham, and camped in Marah.
NUM 33:9 They traveled from Marah and came to Elim; in Elim there are twelve fountains of water and seventy palm trees, so they camped there.
NUM 33:10 They traveled from Elim, and camped by the Red Sea.
NUM 33:11 They traveled from the Red Sea and camped in the wilderness of Zin.
NUM 33:12 They traveled from the wilderness of Zin and camped in Dophkah.
NUM 33:13 And they traveled from Dophkah, and camped in Alush.
NUM 33:14 They traveled from Alush and camped at Rephidim, where there was no water for the people to drink.
NUM 33:15 They traveled from Rephidim and camped in the wilderness of Sinai.
NUM 33:16 They traveled from the desert of Sinai and camped at Kibroth Hattaavah.
NUM 33:17 They traveled from Kibroth Hattaavah and camped at Hazeroth.
NUM 33:18 They traveled from Hazeroth and camped in Rithmah.
NUM 33:19 They traveled from Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez.
NUM 33:20 They traveled from Rimmon-perez and camped in Libnah.
NUM 33:21 They traveled from Libnah and camped at Rissah.
NUM 33:22 They traveled from Rissah and camped in Kehelathah.
NUM 33:23 They traveled from Kehelathah and camped at Mount Shepher.
NUM 33:24 They traveled from Mount Shepher and camped in Haradah.
NUM 33:25 They traveled from Haradah and camped in Makheloth.
NUM 33:26 They traveled from Makheloth and camped at Tahath.
NUM 33:27 They traveled from Tahath and camped at Terah.
NUM 33:28 They traveled from Terah and camped in Mithcah.
NUM 33:29 They traveled from Mithcah and camped in Hashmonah.
NUM 33:30 They traveled from Hashmonah and camped in Moseroth.
NUM 33:31 They traveled from Moseroth and camped in Bene-jaakan.
NUM 33:32 They traveled from Bene-jaakan and camped at Hor-haggidgad.
NUM 33:33 They traveled from Hor-haggidgad and camped in Jotbathah.
NUM 33:34 They traveled from Jotbathah and camped in Abronah.
NUM 33:35 They traveled from Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber.
NUM 33:36 They traveled from Ezion-geber and camped in the wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh.
NUM 33:37 They traveled from Kadesh and camped in Mount Hor at the edge of the land of Edom.
NUM 33:38 Aaron the priest ascended Mount Hor at the command of the Lord, and he died there in the fortieth year after the Israelites had come out of the land of Egypt on the first day of the fifth month.
NUM 33:39 Now Aaron was 123 years old when he died in Mount Hor.
NUM 33:40 The king of Arad, the Canaanite king who lived in the south of the land of Canaan, heard about the approach of the Israelites.
NUM 33:41 They traveled from Mount Hor and camped in Zalmonah.
NUM 33:42 They traveled from Zalmonah and camped in Punon.
NUM 33:43 They traveled from Punon and camped in Oboth.
NUM 33:44 They traveled from Oboth and camped in Iye-abarim, on the border of Moab.
NUM 33:45 They traveled from Iim and camped in Dibon-gad.
NUM 33:46 They traveled from Dibon-gad and camped in Almon-diblathaim.
NUM 33:47 They traveled from Almon-diblathaim and camped in the mountains of Abarim before Nebo.
NUM 33:48 They traveled from the mountains of Abarim and camped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan River across from Jericho.
NUM 33:49 They camped by the Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth as far as Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.
NUM 33:50 The Lord spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan, across from Jericho. He said:
NUM 33:51 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you have crossed the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
NUM 33:52 you must drive out all the inhabitants of the land before you. Destroy all their carved images, all their molten images, and demolish their high places.
NUM 33:53 You must dispossess the inhabitants of the land and live in it, for I have given you the land to possess it.
NUM 33:54 You must divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families. To a larger group you must give a larger inheritance, and to a smaller group you must give a smaller inheritance. Everyone’s inheritance must be in the place where his lot falls. You must inherit according to your ancestral tribes.
NUM 33:55 But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land before you, then those whom you allow to remain will be irritants in your eyes and thorns in your side, and will cause you trouble in the land where you will be living.
NUM 33:56 And what I intended to do to them I will do to you.”
NUM 34:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 34:2 “Give these instructions to the Israelites, and tell them: ‘When you enter Canaan, the land that has been assigned to you as an inheritance, the land of Canaan with its borders,
NUM 34:3 your southern border will extend from the wilderness of Zin along the Edomite border, and your southern border will run eastward to the extremity of the Salt Sea,
NUM 34:4 and then the border will turn from the south to the Scorpion Ascent, continue to Zin, and then its direction will be from the south to Kadesh Barnea. Then it will go to Hazar Addar and pass over to Azmon.
NUM 34:5 There the border will turn from Azmon to the Brook of Egypt, and then its direction is to the sea.
NUM 34:6 “‘And for a western border you will have the Great Sea. This will be your western border.
NUM 34:7 “‘And this will be your northern border: From the Great Sea you will draw a line to Mount Hor;
NUM 34:8 from Mount Hor you will draw a line to Lebo Hamath, and the direction of the border will be to Zedad.
NUM 34:9 The border will continue to Ziphron, and its direction will be to Hazar Enan. This will be your northern border.
NUM 34:10 “‘For your eastern border you will draw a line from Hazar Enan to Shepham.
NUM 34:11 The border will run down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain, and the border will descend and reach the eastern side of the Sea of Chinnereth.
NUM 34:12 Then the border will continue down the Jordan River and its direction will be to the Salt Sea. This will be your land by its borders that surround it.’”
NUM 34:13 Then Moses commanded the Israelites: “This is the land which you will inherit by lot, which the Lord has commanded to be given to the nine and a half tribes,
NUM 34:14 because the tribe of the Reubenites by their families, the tribe of the Gadites by their families, and half of the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance.
NUM 34:15 The two and a half tribes have received their inheritance on this side of the Jordan, east of Jericho, toward the sunrise.”
NUM 34:16 The Lord said to Moses:
NUM 34:17 “These are the names of the men who are to allocate the land to you as an inheritance: Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun.
NUM 34:18 You must take one leader from every tribe to assist in allocating the land as an inheritance.
NUM 34:19 These are the names of the men: from the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;
NUM 34:20 from the tribe of the Simeonites, Shemuel son of Ammihud;
NUM 34:21 from the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad son of Kislon;
NUM 34:22 and from the tribe of the Danites, a leader, Bukki son of Jogli.
NUM 34:23 From the Josephites, Hanniel son of Ephod, a leader from the tribe of Manasseh;
NUM 34:24 from the tribe of the Ephraimites, a leader, Kemuel son of Shiphtan;
NUM 34:25 from the tribe of the Zebulunites, a leader, Elizaphan son of Parnach;
NUM 34:26 from the tribe of the Issacharites, a leader, Paltiel son of Azzan;
NUM 34:27 from the tribe of the Asherites, a leader, Ahihud son of Shelomi;
NUM 34:28 and from the tribe of the Naphtalites, a leader, Pedahel son of Ammihud.”
NUM 34:29 These are the ones whom the Lord commanded to divide up the inheritance among the Israelites in the land of Canaan.
NUM 35:1 Then the Lord spoke to Moses in the Moabite plains by the Jordan near Jericho. He said:
NUM 35:2 “Instruct the Israelites to give the Levites towns to live in from the inheritance the Israelites will possess. You must also give the Levites grazing land around the towns.
NUM 35:3 Thus they will have towns in which to live, and their grazing lands will be for their cattle, for their possessions, and for all their animals.
NUM 35:4 The grazing lands around the towns that you will give to the Levites must extend to a distance of 500 yards from the town wall.
NUM 35:5 “You must measure from outside the wall of the town on the east 1,000 yards, and on the south side 1,000 yards, and on the west side 1,000 yards, and on the north side 1,000 yards, with the town in the middle. This territory must belong to them as grazing land for the towns.
NUM 35:6 Now from these towns that you will give to the Levites you must select six towns of refuge to which a person who has killed someone may flee. And you must give them forty-two other towns.
NUM 35:7 “So the total of the towns you will give the Levites is forty-eight. You must give these together with their grazing lands.
NUM 35:8 The towns you will give must be from the possession of the Israelites. From the larger tribes you must give more; and from the smaller tribes fewer. Each must contribute some of its own towns to the Levites in proportion to the inheritance allocated to each.
NUM 35:9 Then the Lord spoke to Moses:
NUM 35:10 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you cross over the Jordan River into the land of Canaan,
NUM 35:11 you must then designate some towns as towns of refuge for you, to which a person who has killed someone unintentionally may flee.
NUM 35:12 And they must stand as your towns of refuge from the avenger in order that the killer may not die until he has stood trial before the community.
NUM 35:13 These towns that you must give shall be your six towns for refuge.
NUM 35:14 “You must give three towns on this side of the Jordan, and you must give three towns in the land of Canaan; they must be towns of refuge.
NUM 35:15 These six towns will be places of refuge for the Israelites, and for the foreigner, and for the settler among them, so that anyone who kills any person accidentally may flee there.
NUM 35:16 “But if he hits someone with an iron tool so that he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer must surely be put to death.
NUM 35:17 If he strikes him by throwing a stone large enough that he could die, and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer must surely be put to death.
NUM 35:18 Or if he strikes him with a wooden hand weapon so that he could die, and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer must surely be put to death.
NUM 35:19 The avenger of blood himself must kill the murderer; when he meets him, he must kill him.
NUM 35:20 “But if he strikes him out of hatred or throws something at him intentionally so that he dies,
NUM 35:21 or with enmity he strikes him with his hand and he dies, the one who struck him must surely be put to death, for he is a murderer. The avenger of blood must kill the murderer when he meets him.
NUM 35:22 “But if he strikes him suddenly, without enmity, or throws anything at him unintentionally,
NUM 35:23 or with any stone large enough that a man could die, without seeing him, and throws it at him, and he dies, even though he was not his enemy nor sought his harm,
NUM 35:24 then the community must judge between the slayer and the avenger of blood according to these decisions.
NUM 35:25 The community must deliver the slayer out of the hand of the avenger of blood, and the community must restore him to the town of refuge to which he fled, and he must live there until the death of the high priest, who was anointed with the consecrated oil.
NUM 35:26 But if the slayer at any time goes outside the boundary of the town to which he had fled,
NUM 35:27 and the avenger of blood finds him outside the borders of the town of refuge, and the avenger of blood kills the slayer, he will not be guilty of blood,
NUM 35:28 because the slayer should have stayed in his town of refuge until the death of the high priest. But after the death of the high priest, the slayer may return to the land of his possessions.
NUM 35:29 So these things must be a statutory ordinance for you throughout your generations, in all the places where you live.
NUM 35:30 “Whoever kills any person, the murderer must be put to death by the testimony of witnesses; but one witness cannot testify against any person to cause him to be put to death.
NUM 35:31 Moreover, you must not accept a ransom for the life of a murderer who is guilty of death; he must surely be put to death.
NUM 35:32 And you must not accept a ransom for anyone who has fled to a town of refuge, to allow him to return home and live on his own land before the death of the high priest.
NUM 35:33 “You must not pollute the land where you live, for blood defiles the land, and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed there, except by the blood of the person who shed it.
NUM 35:34 Therefore do not defile the land that you will inhabit, in which I live, for I the Lord live among the Israelites.”
NUM 36:1 Then the heads of the family groups of the Gileadites, the descendant of Machir, the descendant of Manasseh, who were from the Josephite families, approached and spoke before Moses and the leaders who were the heads of the Israelite families.
NUM 36:2 They said, “The Lord commanded my lord to give the land as an inheritance by lot to the Israelites; and my lord was commanded by the Lord to give the inheritance of our brother Zelophehad to his daughters.
NUM 36:3 Now if they should be married to one of the men from another Israelite tribe, their inheritance would be taken from the inheritance of our fathers and added to the inheritance of the tribe into which they marry. As a result, it will be taken from the lot of our inheritance.
NUM 36:4 And when the Jubilee of the Israelites is to take place, their inheritance will be added to the inheritance of the tribe into which they marry. So their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of our ancestral tribe.”
NUM 36:5 Then Moses gave a ruling to the Israelites by the word of the Lord: “What the tribe of the Josephites is saying is right.
NUM 36:6 This is what the Lord has commanded for Zelophehad’s daughters: ‘Let them marry whomever they think best, only they must marry within the family of their father’s tribe.
NUM 36:7 In this way the inheritance of the Israelites will not be transferred from tribe to tribe. But every one of the Israelites must retain the ancestral heritage.
NUM 36:8 And every daughter who possesses an inheritance from any of the tribes of the Israelites must become the wife of a man from any family in her father’s tribe, so that every Israelite may retain the inheritance of his fathers.
NUM 36:9 No inheritance may pass from tribe to tribe. But every one of the tribes of the Israelites must retain its inheritance.”
NUM 36:10 As the Lord had commanded Moses, so the daughters of Zelophehad did.
NUM 36:11 For the daughters of Zelophehad – Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Noah – were married to the sons of their uncles.
NUM 36:12 They were married into the families of the Manassehites, the descendants of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of their father’s family.
NUM 36:13 These are the commandments and the decisions that the Lord commanded the Israelites through the authority of Moses, on the plains of Moab by the Jordan River opposite Jericho.
DEU 1:1 This is what Moses said to the assembly of Israel in the Transjordanian wastelands, the arid country opposite Suph, between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Di Zahab
DEU 1:2 Now it is ordinarily an eleven-day journey from Horeb to Kadesh Barnea by way of Mount Seir.
DEU 1:3 However, it was not until the first day of the eleventh month of the fortieth year that Moses addressed the Israelites just as the Lord had instructed him to do.
DEU 1:4 This took place after the defeat of King Sihon of the Amorites, whose capital was in Heshbon, and King Og of Bashan, whose capital was in Ashtaroth, specifically in Edrei.
DEU 1:5 So it was in the Transjordan, in Moab, that Moses began to deliver these words:
DEU 1:6 The Lord our God spoke to us at Horeb and said, “You have stayed in the area of this mountain long enough.
DEU 1:7 Get up now, resume your journey, heading for the Amorite hill country, to all its areas including the arid country, the highlands, the Shephelah, the Negev, and the coastal plain – all of Canaan and Lebanon as far as the Great River, that is, the Euphrates.
DEU 1:8 Look! I have already given the land to you. Go, occupy the territory that I, the Lord, promised to give to your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to their descendants.”
DEU 1:9 I also said to you at that time, “I am no longer able to sustain you by myself.
DEU 1:10 The Lord your God has increased your population to the point that you are now as numerous as the very stars of the sky.
DEU 1:11 Indeed, may the Lord, the God of your ancestors, make you a thousand times more numerous than you are now, blessing you just as he said he would!
DEU 1:12 But how can I alone bear up under the burden of your hardship and strife?
DEU 1:13 Select wise and practical men, those known among your tribes, whom I may appoint as your leaders.”
DEU 1:14 You replied to me that what I had said to you was good.
DEU 1:15 So I chose as your tribal leaders wise and well-known men, placing them over you as administrators of groups of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens, and also as other tribal officials.
DEU 1:16 I furthermore admonished your judges at that time that they should pay attention to issues among your fellow citizens and judge fairly, whether between one citizen and another or a citizen and a resident foreigner.
DEU 1:17 They must not discriminate in judgment, but hear the lowly and the great alike. Nor should they be intimidated by human beings, for judgment belongs to God. If the matter being adjudicated is too difficult for them, they should bring it before me for a hearing.
DEU 1:18 So I instructed you at that time regarding everything you should do.
DEU 1:19 Then we left Horeb and passed through all that immense, forbidding wilderness that you saw on the way to the Amorite hill country as the Lord our God had commanded us to do, finally arriving at Kadesh Barnea.
DEU 1:20 Then I said to you, “You have come to the Amorite hill country which the Lord our God is about to give us.
DEU 1:21 Look, he has placed the land in front of you! Go up, take possession of it, just as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, said to do. Do not be afraid or discouraged!”
DEU 1:22 So all of you approached me and said, “Let’s send some men ahead of us to scout out the land and bring us back word as to how we should attack it and what the cities are like there.”
DEU 1:23 I thought this was a good idea, so I sent twelve men from among you, one from each tribe.
DEU 1:24 They left and went up to the hill country, coming to the Eshcol Valley, which they scouted out.
DEU 1:25 Then they took some of the produce of the land and carried it back down to us. They also brought a report to us, saying, “The land that the Lord our God is about to give us is good.”
DEU 1:26 You were not willing to go up, however, but instead rebelled against the Lord your God.
DEU 1:27 You complained among yourselves privately and said, “Because the Lord hates us he brought us from Egypt to deliver us over to the Amorites so they could destroy us!
DEU 1:28 What is going to happen to us? Our brothers have drained away our courage by describing people who are more numerous and taller than we are, and great cities whose defenses appear to be as high as heaven itself! Moreover, they said they saw Anakites there.”
DEU 1:29 So I responded to you, “Do not be terrified of them!
DEU 1:30 The Lord your God is about to go ahead of you; he will fight for you, just as you saw him do in Egypt
DEU 1:31 and in the desert, where you saw him carrying you along like a man carries his son. This he did everywhere you went until you came to this very place.”
DEU 1:32 However, through all this you did not have confidence in the Lord your God,
DEU 1:33 the one who was constantly going before you to find places for you to set up camp. He appeared by fire at night and cloud by day, to show you the way you ought to go.
DEU 1:34 When the Lord heard you, he became angry and made this vow:
DEU 1:35 “Not a single person of this evil generation will see the good land that I promised to give to your ancestors!
DEU 1:36 The exception is Caleb son of Jephunneh; he will see it and I will give him and his descendants the territory on which he has walked, because he has wholeheartedly followed me.”
DEU 1:37 As for me, the Lord was also angry with me on your account. He said, “You also will not be able to go there.
DEU 1:38 However, Joshua son of Nun, your assistant, will go. Encourage him, because he will enable Israel to inherit the land.
DEU 1:39 Also, your infants, who you thought would die on the way, and your children, who as yet do not know good from bad, will go there; I will give them the land and they will possess it.
DEU 1:40 But as for you, turn back and head for the desert by the way to the Red Sea.”
DEU 1:41 Then you responded to me and admitted, “We have sinned against the Lord. We will now go up and fight as the Lord our God has told us to do.” So you each put on your battle gear and prepared to go up to the hill country.
DEU 1:42 But the Lord told me: “Tell them this: ‘Do not go up and fight, because I will not be with you and you will be defeated by your enemies.’”
DEU 1:43 I spoke to you, but you did not listen. Instead you rebelled against the Lord and recklessly went up to the hill country.
DEU 1:44 The Amorite inhabitants of that area confronted you and chased you like a swarm of bees, striking you down from Seir as far as Hormah.
DEU 1:45 Then you came back and wept before the Lord, but he paid no attention to you whatsoever.
DEU 1:46 Therefore, you remained at Kadesh for a long time – indeed, for the full time.
DEU 2:1 Then we turned and set out toward the desert land on the way to the Red Sea just as the Lord told me to do, detouring around Mount Seir for a long time.
DEU 2:2 At this point the Lord said to me,
DEU 2:3 “You have circled around this mountain long enough; now turn north.
DEU 2:4 Instruct these people as follows: ‘You are about to cross the border of your relatives the descendants of Esau, who inhabit Seir. They will be afraid of you, so watch yourselves carefully.
DEU 2:5 Do not be hostile toward them, because I am not giving you any of their land, not even a footprint, for I have given Mount Seir as an inheritance for Esau.
DEU 2:6 You may purchase food to eat and water to drink from them.
DEU 2:7 All along the way I, the Lord your God, have blessed your every effort. I have been attentive to your travels through this great wasteland. These forty years I have been with you; you have lacked for nothing.’”
DEU 2:8 So we turned away from our relatives the descendants of Esau, the inhabitants of Seir, turning from the desert route, from Elat and Ezion Geber, and traveling the way of the Moab wastelands.
DEU 2:9 Then the Lord said to me, “Do not harass Moab and provoke them to war, for I will not give you any of their land as your territory. This is because I have given Ar to the descendants of Lot as their possession.
DEU 2:10 (The Emites used to live there, a people as powerful, numerous, and tall as the Anakites.
DEU 2:11 These people, as well as the Anakites, are also considered Rephaites; the Moabites call them Emites.
DEU 2:12 Previously the Horites lived in Seir but the descendants of Esau dispossessed and destroyed them and settled in their place, just as Israel did to the land it came to possess, the land the Lord gave them.)
DEU 2:13 Now, get up and cross the Wadi Zered.” So we did so.
DEU 2:14 Now the length of time it took for us to go from Kadesh Barnea to the crossing of Wadi Zered was thirty-eight years, time for all the military men of that generation to die, just as the Lord had vowed to them.
DEU 2:15 Indeed, it was the very hand of the Lord that eliminated them from within the camp until they were all gone.
DEU 2:16 So it was that after all the military men had been eliminated from the community,
DEU 2:17 the Lord said to me,
DEU 2:18 “Today you are going to cross the border of Moab, that is, of Ar.
DEU 2:19 But when you come close to the Ammonites, do not harass or provoke them because I am not giving you any of the Ammonites’ land as your possession; I have already given it to Lot’s descendants as their possession.
DEU 2:20 (That also is considered to be a land of the Rephaites. The Rephaites lived there originally; the Ammonites call them Zamzummites.
DEU 2:21 They are a people as powerful, numerous, and tall as the Anakites. But the Lord destroyed the Rephaites in advance of the Ammonites, so they dispossessed them and settled down in their place.
DEU 2:22 This is exactly what he did for the descendants of Esau who lived in Seir when he destroyed the Horites before them so that they could dispossess them and settle in their area to this very day.
DEU 2:23 As for the Avvites who lived in settlements as far west as Gaza, Caphtorites who came from Crete destroyed them and settled down in their place.)
DEU 2:24 Get up, make your way across Wadi Arnon. Look! I have already delivered over to you Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Go ahead! Take it! Engage him in war!
DEU 2:25 This very day I will begin to fill all the people of the earth with dread and to terrify them when they hear about you. They will shiver and shake in anticipation of your approach.”
DEU 2:26 Then I sent messengers from the Kedemoth Desert to King Sihon of Heshbon with an offer of peace:
DEU 2:27 “Let me pass through your land; I will keep strictly to the roadway. I will not turn aside to the right or the left.
DEU 2:28 Sell me food for cash so that I can eat and sell me water to drink. Just allow me to go through on foot,
DEU 2:29 just as the descendants of Esau who live at Seir and the Moabites who live in Ar did for me, until I cross the Jordan to the land the Lord our God is giving us.”
DEU 2:30 But King Sihon of Heshbon was unwilling to allow us to pass near him because the Lord our God had made him obstinate and stubborn so that he might deliver him over to you this very day.
DEU 2:31 The Lord said to me, “Look! I have already begun to give over Sihon and his land to you. Start right now to take his land as your possession.”
DEU 2:32 When Sihon and all his troops emerged to encounter us in battle at Jahaz,
DEU 2:33 the Lord our God delivered him over to us and we struck him down, along with his sons and everyone else.
DEU 2:34 At that time we seized all his cities and put every one of them under divine judgment, including even the women and children; we left no survivors.
DEU 2:35 We kept only the livestock and plunder from the cities for ourselves.
DEU 2:36 From Aroer, which is at the edge of Wadi Arnon (it is the city in the wadi), all the way to Gilead there was not a town able to resist us – the Lord our God gave them all to us.
DEU 2:37 However, you did not approach the land of the Ammonites, the Wadi Jabbok, the cities of the hill country, or any place else forbidden by the Lord our God.
DEU 3:1 Next we set out on the route to Bashan, but King Og of Bashan and his whole army came out to meet us in battle at Edrei.
DEU 3:2 The Lord, however, said to me, “Don’t be afraid of him because I have already given him, his whole army, and his land to you. You will do to him exactly what you did to King Sihon of the Amorites who lived in Heshbon.”
DEU 3:3 So the Lord our God did indeed give over to us King Og of Bashan and his whole army and we struck them down until not a single survivor was left.
DEU 3:4 We captured all his cities at that time – there was not a town we did not take from them – sixty cities, all the region of Argob, the dominion of Og in Bashan.
DEU 3:5 All of these cities were fortified by high walls, gates, and locking bars; in addition there were a great many open villages.
DEU 3:6 We put all of these under divine judgment just as we had done to King Sihon of Heshbon – every occupied city, including women and children.
DEU 3:7 But all the livestock and plunder from the cities we kept for ourselves.
DEU 3:8 So at that time we took the land of the two Amorite kings in the Transjordan from Wadi Arnon to Mount Hermon
DEU 3:9 (the Sidonians call Hermon Sirion and the Amorites call it Senir),
DEU 3:10 all the cities of the plateau, all of Gilead and Bashan as far as Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
DEU 3:11 Only King Og of Bashan was left of the remaining Rephaites. (It is noteworthy that his sarcophagus was made of iron. Does it not, indeed, still remain in Rabbath of the Ammonites? It is thirteen and a half feet long and six feet wide according to standard measure.)
DEU 3:12 This is the land we brought under our control at that time: The territory extending from Aroer by the Wadi Arnon and half the Gilead hill country with its cities I gave to the Reubenites and Gadites.
DEU 3:13 The rest of Gilead and all of Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to half the tribe of Manasseh. (All the region of Argob, that is, all Bashan, is called the land of Rephaim.
DEU 3:14 Jair, son of Manasseh, took all the Argob region as far as the border with the Geshurites and Maacathites (namely Bashan) and called it by his name, Havvoth-Jair, which it retains to this very day.)
DEU 3:15 I gave Gilead to Machir.
DEU 3:16 To the Reubenites and Gadites I allocated the territory extending from Gilead as far as Wadi Arnon (the exact middle of the wadi was a boundary) all the way to the Wadi Jabbok, the Ammonite border.
DEU 3:17 The Arabah and the Jordan River were also a border, from the sea of Chinnereth to the sea of the Arabah (that is, the Salt Sea), beneath the watershed of Pisgah to the east.
DEU 3:18 At that time I instructed you as follows: “The Lord your God has given you this land for your possession. You warriors are to cross over before your fellow Israelites equipped for battle.
DEU 3:19 But your wives, children, and livestock (of which I know you have many) may remain in the cities I have given you.
DEU 3:20 You must fight until the Lord gives your countrymen victory as he did you and they take possession of the land that the Lord your God is giving them on the other side of the Jordan River. Then each of you may return to his own territory that I have given you.”
DEU 3:21 I also commanded Joshua at the same time, “You have seen everything the Lord your God did to these two kings; he will do the same to all the kingdoms where you are going.
DEU 3:22 Do not be afraid of them, for the Lord your God will personally fight for you.”
DEU 3:23 Moreover, at that time I pleaded with the Lord,
DEU 3:24 “O, Lord God, you have begun to show me your greatness and strength. (What god in heaven or earth can rival your works and mighty deeds?)
DEU 3:25 Let me please cross over to see the good land on the other side of the Jordan River – this good hill country and the Lebanon!”
DEU 3:26 But the Lord was angry at me because of you and would not listen to me. Instead, he said to me, “Enough of that! Do not speak to me anymore about this matter.
DEU 3:27 Go up to the top of Pisgah and take a good look to the west, north, south, and east, for you will not be allowed to cross the Jordan.
DEU 3:28 Commission Joshua, and encourage and strengthen him, because he will lead these people over and will enable them to inherit the land you will see.”
DEU 3:29 So we settled down in the valley opposite Beth Peor.
DEU 4:1 Now, Israel, pay attention to the statutes and ordinances I am about to teach you, so that you might live and go on to enter and take possession of the land that the Lord, the God of your ancestors, is giving you.
DEU 4:2 Do not add a thing to what I command you nor subtract from it, so that you may keep the commandments of the Lord your God that I am delivering to you.
DEU 4:3 You have witnessed what the Lord did at Baal Peor, how he eradicated from your midst everyone who followed Baal Peor.
DEU 4:4 But you who remained faithful to the Lord your God are still alive to this very day, every one of you.
DEU 4:5 Look! I have taught you statutes and ordinances just as the Lord my God told me to do, so that you might carry them out in the land you are about to enter and possess.
DEU 4:6 So be sure to do them, because this will testify of your wise understanding to the people who will learn of all these statutes and say, “Indeed, this great nation is a very wise people.”
DEU 4:7 In fact, what other great nation has a god so near to them like the Lord our God whenever we call on him?
DEU 4:8 And what other great nation has statutes and ordinances as just as this whole law that I am about to share with you today?
DEU 4:9 Again, however, pay very careful attention, lest you forget the things you have seen and disregard them for the rest of your life; instead teach them to your children and grandchildren.
DEU 4:10 You stood before the Lord your God at Horeb and he said to me, “Assemble the people before me so that I can tell them my commands. Then they will learn to revere me all the days they live in the land, and they will instruct their children.”
DEU 4:11 You approached and stood at the foot of the mountain, a mountain ablaze to the sky above it and yet dark with a thick cloud.
DEU 4:12 Then the Lord spoke to you from the middle of the fire; you heard speech but you could not see anything – only a voice was heard.
DEU 4:13 And he revealed to you the covenant he has commanded you to keep, the ten commandments, writing them on two stone tablets.
DEU 4:14 Moreover, at that same time the Lord commanded me to teach you statutes and ordinances for you to keep in the land which you are about to enter and possess.
DEU 4:15 Be very careful, then, because you saw no form at the time the Lord spoke to you at Horeb from the middle of the fire.
DEU 4:16 I say this so you will not corrupt yourselves by making an image in the form of any kind of figure. This includes the likeness of a human male or female,
DEU 4:17 any kind of land animal, any bird that flies in the sky,
DEU 4:18 anything that crawls on the ground, or any fish in the deep waters of the earth.
DEU 4:19 When you look up to the sky and see the sun, moon, and stars – the whole heavenly creation – you must not be seduced to worship and serve them, for the Lord your God has assigned them to all the people of the world.
DEU 4:20 You, however, the Lord has selected and brought from Egypt, that iron-smelting furnace, to be his special people as you are today.
DEU 4:21 But the Lord became angry with me because of you and vowed that I would never cross the Jordan nor enter the good land that he is about to give you.
DEU 4:22 So I must die here in this land; I will not cross the Jordan. But you are going over and will possess that good land.
DEU 4:23 Be on guard so that you do not forget the covenant of the Lord your God that he has made with you, and that you do not make an image of any kind, just as he has forbidden you.
DEU 4:24 For the Lord your God is a consuming fire; he is a jealous God.
DEU 4:25 After you have produced children and grandchildren and have been in the land a long time, if you become corrupt and make an image of any kind and do other evil things before the Lord your God that enrage him,
DEU 4:26 I invoke heaven and earth as witnesses against you today that you will surely and swiftly be removed from the very land you are about to cross the Jordan to possess. You will not last long there because you will surely be annihilated.
DEU 4:27 Then the Lord will scatter you among the peoples and there will be very few of you among the nations where the Lord will drive you.
DEU 4:28 There you will worship gods made by human hands – wood and stone that can neither see, hear, eat, nor smell.
DEU 4:29 But if you seek the Lord your God from there, you will find him, if, indeed, you seek him with all your heart and soul.
DEU 4:30 In your distress when all these things happen to you in the latter days, if you return to the Lord your God and obey him
DEU 4:31 (for he is a merciful God), he will not let you down or destroy you, for he cannot forget the covenant with your ancestors that he confirmed by oath to them.
DEU 4:32 Indeed, ask about the distant past, starting from the day God created humankind on the earth, and ask from one end of heaven to the other, whether there has ever been such a great thing as this, or even a rumor of it.
DEU 4:33 Have a people ever heard the voice of God speaking from the middle of fire, as you yourselves have, and lived to tell about it?
DEU 4:34 Or has God ever before tried to deliver a nation from the middle of another nation, accompanied by judgments, signs, wonders, war, strength, power, and other very terrifying things like the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes?
DEU 4:35 You have been taught that the Lord alone is God – there is no other besides him.
DEU 4:36 From heaven he spoke to you in order to teach you, and on earth he showed you his great fire from which you also heard his words.
DEU 4:37 Moreover, because he loved your ancestors, he chose their descendants who followed them and personally brought you out of Egypt with his great power
DEU 4:38 to dispossess nations greater and stronger than you and brought you here this day to give you their land as your property.
DEU 4:39 Today realize and carefully consider that the Lord is God in heaven above and on earth below – there is no other!
DEU 4:40 Keep his statutes and commandments that I am setting forth today so that it may go well with you and your descendants and that you may enjoy longevity in the land that the Lord your God is about to give you as a permanent possession.
DEU 4:41 Then Moses selected three cities in the Transjordan, toward the east.
DEU 4:42 Anyone who accidentally killed someone without hating him at the time of the accident could flee to one of those cities and be safe.
DEU 4:43 These cities are Bezer, in the desert plateau, for the Reubenites; Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan for the Manassehites.
DEU 4:44 This is the law that Moses set before the Israelites.
DEU 4:45 These are the stipulations, statutes, and ordinances that Moses spoke to the Israelites after he had brought them out of Egypt,
DEU 4:46 in the Transjordan, in the valley opposite Beth Peor, in the land of King Sihon of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon. (It is he whom Moses and the Israelites attacked after they came out of Egypt.
DEU 4:47 They possessed his land and that of King Og of Bashan – both of whom were Amorite kings in the Transjordan, to the east.
DEU 4:48 Their territory extended from Aroer at the edge of the Arnon valley as far as Mount Siyon – that is, Hermon –
DEU 4:49 including all the Arabah of the Transjordan in the east to the sea of the Arabah, beneath the watershed of Pisgah.)
DEU 5:1 Then Moses called all the people of Israel together and said to them: “Listen, Israel, to the statutes and ordinances that I am about to deliver to you today; learn them and be careful to keep them!
DEU 5:2 The Lord our God made a covenant with us at Horeb.
DEU 5:3 He did not make this covenant with our ancestors but with us, we who are here today, all of us living now.
DEU 5:4 The Lord spoke face to face with you at the mountain, from the middle of the fire.
DEU 5:5 (I was standing between the Lord and you at that time to reveal to you the message of the Lord, because you were afraid of the fire and would not go up the mountain.) He said:
DEU 5:6 “I am the Lord your God, he who brought you from the land of Egypt, from the place of slavery.
DEU 5:7 You must not have any other gods besides me.
DEU 5:8 You must not make for yourself an image of anything in heaven above, on earth below, or in the waters beneath.
DEU 5:9 You must not worship or serve them, for I, the Lord your God, am a jealous God. I punish the sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons for the sin of the fathers who reject me,
DEU 5:10 but I show covenant faithfulness to the thousands who choose me and keep my commandments.
DEU 5:11 You must not make use of the name of the Lord your God for worthless purposes, for the Lord will not exonerate anyone who abuses his name that way.
DEU 5:12 Be careful to observe the Sabbath day just as the Lord your God has commanded you.
DEU 5:13 You are to work and do all your tasks in six days,
DEU 5:14 but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord your God. On that day you must not do any work, you, your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, your ox, your donkey, any other animal, or the foreigner who lives with you, so that your male and female slaves, like yourself, may have rest.
DEU 5:15 Recall that you were slaves in the land of Egypt and that the Lord your God brought you out of there by strength and power. That is why the Lord your God has commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.
DEU 5:16 Honor your father and your mother just as the Lord your God has commanded you to do, so that your days may be extended and that it may go well with you in the land that he is about to give you.
DEU 5:17 You must not murder.
DEU 5:18 You must not commit adultery.
DEU 5:19 You must not steal.
DEU 5:20 You must not offer false testimony against another.
DEU 5:21 You must not desire another man’s wife, nor should you crave his house, his field, his male and female servants, his ox, his donkey, or anything else he owns.”
DEU 5:22 The Lord said these things to your entire assembly at the mountain from the middle of the fire, the cloud, and the darkness with a loud voice, and that was all he said. Then he inscribed the words on two stone tablets and gave them to me.
DEU 5:23 Then, when you heard the voice from the midst of the darkness while the mountain was ablaze, all your tribal leaders and elders approached me.
DEU 5:24 You said, “The Lord our God has shown us his great glory and we have heard him speak from the middle of the fire. It is now clear to us that God can speak to human beings and they can keep on living.
DEU 5:25 But now, why should we die, because this intense fire will consume us! If we keep hearing the voice of the Lord our God we will die!
DEU 5:26 Who is there from the entire human race who has heard the voice of the living God speaking from the middle of the fire as we have, and has lived?
DEU 5:27 You go near so that you can hear everything the Lord our God is saying and then you can tell us whatever he says to you; then we will pay attention and do it.”
DEU 5:28 When the Lord heard you speaking to me, he said to me, “I have heard what these people have said to you – they have spoken well.
DEU 5:29 If only it would really be their desire to fear me and obey all my commandments in the future, so that it may go well with them and their descendants forever.
DEU 5:30 Go and tell them, ‘Return to your tents!’
DEU 5:31 But as for you, remain here with me so I can declare to you all the commandments, statutes, and ordinances that you are to teach them, so that they can carry them out in the land I am about to give them.”
DEU 5:32 Be careful, therefore, to do exactly what the Lord your God has commanded you; do not turn right or left!
DEU 5:33 Walk just as he has commanded you so that you may live, that it may go well with you, and that you may live long in the land you are going to possess.
DEU 6:1 Now these are the commandments, statutes, and ordinances that the Lord your God instructed me to teach you so that you may carry them out in the land where you are headed
DEU 6:2 and that you may so revere the Lord your God that you will keep all his statutes and commandments that I am giving you – you, your children, and your grandchildren – all your lives, to prolong your days.
DEU 6:3 Pay attention, Israel, and be careful to do this so that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly in number – as the Lord, God of your ancestors, said to you, you will have a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU 6:4 Listen, Israel: The Lord is our God, the Lord is one!
DEU 6:5 You must love the Lord your God with your whole mind, your whole being, and all your strength.
DEU 6:6 These words I am commanding you today must be kept in mind,
DEU 6:7 and you must teach them to your children and speak of them as you sit in your house, as you walk along the road, as you lie down, and as you get up.
DEU 6:8 You should tie them as a reminder on your forearm and fasten them as symbols on your forehead.
DEU 6:9 Inscribe them on the doorframes of your houses and gates.
DEU 6:10 Then when the Lord your God brings you to the land he promised your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to give you – a land with large, fine cities you did not build,
DEU 6:11 houses filled with choice things you did not accumulate, hewn out cisterns you did not dig, and vineyards and olive groves you did not plant – and you eat your fill,
DEU 6:12 be careful not to forget the Lord who brought you out of Egypt, that place of slavery.
DEU 6:13 You must revere the Lord your God, serve him, and take oaths using only his name.
DEU 6:14 You must not go after other gods, those of the surrounding peoples,
DEU 6:15 for the Lord your God, who is present among you, is a jealous God and his anger will erupt against you and remove you from the land.
DEU 6:16 You must not put the Lord your God to the test as you did at Massah.
DEU 6:17 Keep his commandments very carefully, as well as the stipulations and statutes he commanded you to observe.
DEU 6:18 Do whatever is proper and good before the Lord so that it may go well with you and that you may enter and occupy the good land that he promised your ancestors,
DEU 6:19 and that you may drive out all your enemies just as the Lord said.
DEU 6:20 When your children ask you later on, “What are the stipulations, statutes, and ordinances that the Lord our God commanded you?”
DEU 6:21 you must say to them, “We were Pharaoh’s slaves in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt in a powerful way.
DEU 6:22 And he brought signs and great, devastating wonders on Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on his whole family before our very eyes.
DEU 6:23 He delivered us from there so that he could give us the land he had promised our ancestors.
DEU 6:24 The Lord commanded us to obey all these statutes and to revere him so that it may always go well for us and he may preserve us, as he has to this day.
DEU 6:25 We will be innocent if we carefully keep all these commandments before the Lord our God, just as he demands.”
DEU 7:1 When the Lord your God brings you to the land that you are going to occupy and forces out many nations before you – Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations more numerous and powerful than you –
DEU 7:2 and he delivers them over to you and you attack them, you must utterly annihilate them. Make no treaty with them and show them no mercy!
DEU 7:3 You must not intermarry with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons,
DEU 7:4 for they will turn your sons away from me to worship other gods. Then the anger of the Lord will erupt against you and he will quickly destroy you.
DEU 7:5 Instead, this is what you must do to them: You must tear down their altars, shatter their sacred pillars, cut down their sacred Asherah poles, and burn up their idols.
DEU 7:6 For you are a people holy to the Lord your God. He has chosen you to be his people, prized above all others on the face of the earth.
DEU 7:7 It is not because you were more numerous than all the other peoples that the Lord favored and chose you – for in fact you were the least numerous of all peoples.
DEU 7:8 Rather it is because of his love for you and his faithfulness to the promise he solemnly vowed to your ancestors that the Lord brought you out with great power, redeeming you from the place of slavery, from the power of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
DEU 7:9 So realize that the Lord your God is the true God, the faithful God who keeps covenant faithfully with those who love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations,
DEU 7:10 but who pays back those who hate him as they deserve and destroys them. He will not ignore those who hate him but will repay them as they deserve!
DEU 7:11 So keep the commandments, statutes, and ordinances that I today am commanding you to do.
DEU 7:12 If you obey these ordinances and are careful to do them, the Lord your God will faithfully keep covenant with you as he promised your ancestors.
DEU 7:13 He will love and bless you, and make you numerous. He will bless you with many children, with the produce of your soil, your grain, your new wine, your oil, the offspring of your oxen, and the young of your flocks in the land which he promised your ancestors to give you.
DEU 7:14 You will be blessed beyond all peoples; there will be no barrenness among you or your livestock.
DEU 7:15 The Lord will protect you from all sickness, and you will not experience any of the terrible diseases that you knew in Egypt; instead he will inflict them on all those who hate you.
DEU 7:16 You must destroy all the people whom the Lord your God is about to deliver over to you; you must not pity them or worship their gods, for that will be a snare to you.
DEU 7:17 If you think, “These nations are more numerous than I – how can I dispossess them?”
DEU 7:18 you must not fear them. You must carefully recall what the Lord your God did to Pharaoh and all Egypt,
DEU 7:19 the great judgments you saw, the signs and wonders, the strength and power by which he brought you out – thus the Lord your God will do to all the people you fear.
DEU 7:20 Furthermore, the Lord your God will release hornets among them until the very last ones who hide from you perish.
DEU 7:21 You must not tremble in their presence, for the Lord your God, who is present among you, is a great and awesome God.
DEU 7:22 He, the God who leads you, will expel the nations little by little. You will not be allowed to destroy them all at once lest the wild animals overrun you.
DEU 7:23 The Lord your God will give them over to you; he will throw them into a great panic until they are destroyed.
DEU 7:24 He will hand over their kings to you and you will erase their very names from memory. Nobody will be able to resist you until you destroy them.
DEU 7:25 You must burn the images of their gods, but do not covet the silver and gold that covers them so much that you take it for yourself and thus become ensnared by it; for it is abhorrent to the Lord your God.
DEU 7:26 You must not bring any abhorrent thing into your house and thereby become an object of divine wrath along with it. You must absolutely detest and abhor it, for it is an object of divine wrath.
DEU 8:1 You must keep carefully all these commandments I am giving you today so that you may live, increase in number, and go in and occupy the land that the Lord promised to your ancestors.
DEU 8:2 Remember the whole way by which he has brought you these forty years through the desert so that he might, by humbling you, test you to see if you have it within you to keep his commandments or not.
DEU 8:3 So he humbled you by making you hungry and then feeding you with unfamiliar manna. He did this to teach you that humankind cannot live by bread alone, but also by everything that comes from the Lord’s mouth.
DEU 8:4 Your clothing did not wear out nor did your feet swell all these forty years.
DEU 8:5 Be keenly aware that just as a parent disciplines his child, the Lord your God disciplines you.
DEU 8:6 So you must keep his commandments, live according to his standards, and revere him.
DEU 8:7 For the Lord your God is bringing you to a good land, a land of brooks, springs, and fountains flowing forth in valleys and hills,
DEU 8:8 a land of wheat, barley, vines, fig trees, and pomegranates, of olive trees and honey,
DEU 8:9 a land where you may eat food in plenty and find no lack of anything, a land whose stones are iron and from whose hills you can mine copper.
DEU 8:10 You will eat your fill and then praise the Lord your God because of the good land he has given you.
DEU 8:11 Be sure you do not forget the Lord your God by not keeping his commandments, ordinances, and statutes that I am giving you today.
DEU 8:12 When you eat your fill, when you build and occupy good houses,
DEU 8:13 when your cattle and flocks increase, when you have plenty of silver and gold, and when you have abundance of everything,
DEU 8:14 be sure you do not feel self-important and forget the Lord your God who brought you from the land of Egypt, the place of slavery,
DEU 8:15 and who brought you through the great, fearful desert of venomous serpents and scorpions, an arid place with no water. He made water flow from a flint rock and
DEU 8:16 fed you in the desert with manna (which your ancestors had never before known) so that he might by humbling you test you and eventually bring good to you.
DEU 8:17 Be careful not to say, “My own ability and skill have gotten me this wealth.”
DEU 8:18 You must remember the Lord your God, for he is the one who gives ability to get wealth; if you do this he will confirm his covenant that he made by oath to your ancestors, even as he has to this day.
DEU 8:19 Now if you forget the Lord your God at all and follow other gods, worshiping and prostrating yourselves before them, I testify to you today that you will surely be annihilated.
DEU 8:20 Just like the nations the Lord is about to destroy from your sight, so he will do to you because you would not obey him.
DEU 9:1 Listen, Israel: Today you are about to cross the Jordan so you can dispossess the nations there, people greater and stronger than you who live in large cities with extremely high fortifications.
DEU 9:2 They include the Anakites, a numerous and tall people whom you know about and of whom it is said, “Who is able to resist the Anakites?”
DEU 9:3 Understand today that the Lord your God who goes before you is a devouring fire; he will defeat and subdue them before you. You will dispossess and destroy them quickly just as he has told you.
DEU 9:4 Do not think to yourself after the Lord your God has driven them out before you, “Because of my own righteousness the Lord has brought me here to possess this land.” It is because of the wickedness of these nations that the Lord is driving them out ahead of you.
DEU 9:5 It is not because of your righteousness, or even your inner uprightness, that you have come here to possess their land. Instead, because of the wickedness of these nations the Lord your God is driving them out ahead of you in order to confirm the promise he made on oath to your ancestors, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
DEU 9:6 Understand, therefore, that it is not because of your righteousness that the Lord your God is about to give you this good land as a possession, for you are a stubborn people!
DEU 9:7 Remember – don’t ever forget – how you provoked the Lord your God in the desert; from the time you left the land of Egypt until you came to this place you were constantly rebelling against him.
DEU 9:8 At Horeb you provoked him and he was angry enough with you to destroy you.
DEU 9:9 When I went up the mountain to receive the stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant that the Lord made with you, I remained there forty days and nights, eating and drinking nothing.
DEU 9:10 The Lord gave me the two stone tablets, written by the very finger of God, and on them was everything he said to you at the mountain from the midst of the fire at the time of that assembly.
DEU 9:11 Now at the end of the forty days and nights the Lord presented me with the two stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant.
DEU 9:12 And he said to me, “Get up, go down at once from here because your people whom you brought out of Egypt have sinned! They have quickly turned from the way I commanded them and have made for themselves a cast metal image.”
DEU 9:13 Moreover, he said to me, “I have taken note of these people; they are a stubborn lot!
DEU 9:14 Stand aside and I will destroy them, obliterating their very name from memory, and I will make you into a stronger and more numerous nation than they are.”
DEU 9:15 So I turned and went down the mountain while it was blazing with fire; the two tablets of the covenant were in my hands.
DEU 9:16 When I looked, you had indeed sinned against the Lord your God and had cast for yourselves a metal calf; you had quickly turned aside from the way he had commanded you!
DEU 9:17 I grabbed the two tablets, threw them down, and shattered them before your very eyes.
DEU 9:18 Then I again fell down before the Lord for forty days and nights; I ate and drank nothing because of all the sin you had committed, doing such evil before the Lord as to enrage him.
DEU 9:19 For I was terrified at the Lord’s intense anger that threatened to destroy you. But he listened to me this time as well.
DEU 9:20 The Lord was also angry enough at Aaron to kill him, but at that time I prayed for him too.
DEU 9:21 As for your sinful thing that you had made, the calf, I took it, melted it down, ground it up until it was as fine as dust, and tossed the dust into the stream that flows down the mountain.
DEU 9:22 Moreover, you continued to provoke the Lord at Taberah, Massah, and Kibroth-Hattaavah.
DEU 9:23 And when he sent you from Kadesh-Barnea and told you, “Go up and possess the land I have given you,” you rebelled against the Lord your God and would neither believe nor obey him.
DEU 9:24 You have been rebelling against him from the very first day I knew you!
DEU 9:25 I lay flat on the ground before the Lord for forty days and nights, for he had said he would destroy you.
DEU 9:26 I prayed to him: O, Lord God, do not destroy your people, your valued property that you have powerfully redeemed, whom you brought out of Egypt by your strength.
DEU 9:27 Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; ignore the stubbornness, wickedness, and sin of these people.
DEU 9:28 Otherwise the people of the land from which you brought us will say, “The Lord was unable to bring them to the land he promised them, and because of his hatred for them he has brought them out to kill them in the desert.”
DEU 9:29 They are your people, your valued property, whom you brought out with great strength and power.
DEU 10:1 At that same time the Lord said to me, “Carve out for yourself two stone tablets like the first ones and come up the mountain to me; also make for yourself a wooden ark.
DEU 10:2 I will write on the tablets the same words that were on the first tablets you broke, and you must put them into the ark.”
DEU 10:3 So I made an ark of acacia wood and carved out two stone tablets just like the first ones. Then I went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hands.
DEU 10:4 The Lord then wrote on the tablets the same words, the ten commandments, which he had spoken to you at the mountain from the middle of the fire at the time of that assembly, and he gave them to me.
DEU 10:5 Then I turned, went down the mountain, and placed the tablets into the ark I had made – they are still there, just as the Lord commanded me.
DEU 10:6 “During those days the Israelites traveled from Beeroth Bene-Yaaqan to Moserah. There Aaron died and was buried, and his son Eleazar became priest in his place.
DEU 10:7 From there they traveled to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a place of flowing streams.
DEU 10:8 At that time the Lord set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the Lord’s covenant, to stand before the Lord to serve him, and to formulate blessings in his name, as they do to this very day.
DEU 10:9 Therefore Levi has no allotment or inheritance among his brothers; the Lord is his inheritance just as the Lord your God told him.
DEU 10:10 As for me, I stayed at the mountain as I did the first time, forty days and nights. The Lord listened to me that time as well and decided not to destroy you.
DEU 10:11 Then he said to me, “Get up, set out leading the people so they may go and possess the land I promised to give to their ancestors.”
DEU 10:12 Now, Israel, what does the Lord your God require of you except to revere him, to obey all his commandments, to love him, to serve him with all your mind and being,
DEU 10:13 and to keep the Lord’s commandments and statutes that I am giving you today for your own good?
DEU 10:14 The heavens – indeed the highest heavens – belong to the Lord your God, as does the earth and everything in it.
DEU 10:15 However, only to your ancestors did he show his loving favor, and he chose you, their descendants, from all peoples – as is apparent today.
DEU 10:16 Therefore, cleanse your heart and stop being so stubborn!
DEU 10:17 For the Lord your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the great, mighty, and awesome God who is unbiased and takes no bribe,
DEU 10:18 who justly treats the orphan and widow, and who loves resident foreigners, giving them food and clothing.
DEU 10:19 So you must love the resident foreigner because you were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
DEU 10:20 Revere the Lord your God, serve him, be loyal to him and take oaths only in his name.
DEU 10:21 He is the one you should praise; he is your God, the one who has done these great and awesome things for you that you have seen.
DEU 10:22 When your ancestors went down to Egypt, they numbered only seventy, but now the Lord your God has made you as numerous as the stars of the sky.
DEU 11:1 You must love the Lord your God and do what he requires; keep his statutes, ordinances, and commandments at all times.
DEU 11:2 Bear in mind today that I am not speaking to your children who have not personally experienced the judgments of the Lord your God, which revealed his greatness, strength, and power.
DEU 11:3 They did not see the awesome deeds he performed in the midst of Egypt against Pharaoh king of Egypt and his whole land,
DEU 11:4 or what he did to the army of Egypt, including their horses and chariots, when he made the waters of the Red Sea overwhelm them while they were pursuing you and he annihilated them.
DEU 11:5 They did not see what he did to you in the desert before you reached this place,
DEU 11:6 or what he did to Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab the Reubenite, when the earth opened its mouth in the middle of the Israelite camp and swallowed them, their families, their tents, and all the property they brought with them.
DEU 11:7 I am speaking to you because you are the ones who saw all the great deeds of the Lord!
DEU 11:8 Now pay attention to all the commandments I am giving you today, so that you may be strong enough to enter and possess the land where you are headed,
DEU 11:9 and that you may enjoy long life in the land the Lord promised to give to your ancestors and their descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU 11:10 For the land where you are headed is not like the land of Egypt from which you came, a land where you planted seed and which you irrigated by hand like a vegetable garden.
DEU 11:11 Instead, the land you are crossing the Jordan to occupy is one of hills and valleys, a land that drinks in water from the rains,
DEU 11:12 a land the Lord your God looks after. He is constantly attentive to it from the beginning to the end of the year.
DEU 11:13 Now, if you pay close attention to my commandments that I am giving you today and love the Lord your God and serve him with all your mind and being,
DEU 11:14 then he promises, “I will send rain for your land in its season, the autumn and the spring rains, so that you may gather in your grain, new wine, and olive oil.
DEU 11:15 I will provide pasture for your livestock and you will eat your fill.”
DEU 11:16 Make sure you do not turn away to serve and worship other gods!
DEU 11:17 Then the anger of the Lord will erupt against you and he will close up the sky so that it does not rain. The land will not yield its produce, and you will soon be removed from the good land that the Lord is about to give you.
DEU 11:18 Fix these words of mine into your mind and being, and tie them as a reminder on your hands and let them be symbols on your forehead.
DEU 11:19 Teach them to your children and speak of them as you sit in your house, as you walk along the road, as you lie down, and as you get up.
DEU 11:20 Inscribe them on the doorframes of your houses and on your gates
DEU 11:21 so that your days and those of your descendants may be extended in the land which the Lord promised to give to your ancestors, like the days of heaven itself.
DEU 11:22 For if you carefully observe all of these commandments I am giving you and love the Lord your God, live according to his standards, and remain loyal to him,
DEU 11:23 then he will drive out all these nations ahead of you, and you will dispossess nations greater and stronger than you.
DEU 11:24 Every place you set your foot will be yours; your border will extend from the desert to Lebanon and from the River (that is, the Euphrates) as far as the Mediterranean Sea.
DEU 11:25 Nobody will be able to resist you; the Lord your God will spread the fear and terror of you over the whole land on which you walk, just as he promised you.
DEU 11:26 Take note – I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse:
DEU 11:27 the blessing if you take to heart the commandments of the Lord your God that I am giving you today,
DEU 11:28 and the curse if you pay no attention to his commandments and turn from the way I am setting before you today to pursue other gods you have not known.
DEU 11:29 When the Lord your God brings you into the land you are to possess, you must pronounce the blessing on Mount Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal.
DEU 11:30 Are they not across the Jordan River, toward the west, in the land of the Canaanites who live in the Arabah opposite Gilgal near the oak of Moreh?
DEU 11:31 For you are about to cross the Jordan to possess the land the Lord your God is giving you, and you will possess and inhabit it.
DEU 11:32 Be certain to keep all the statutes and ordinances that I am presenting to you today.
DEU 12:1 These are the statutes and ordinances you must be careful to obey as long as you live in the land the Lord, the God of your ancestors, has given you to possess.
DEU 12:2 You must by all means destroy all the places where the nations you are about to dispossess worship their gods – on the high mountains and hills and under every leafy tree.
DEU 12:3 You must tear down their altars, shatter their sacred pillars, burn up their sacred Asherah poles, and cut down the images of their gods; you must eliminate their very memory from that place.
DEU 12:4 You must not worship the Lord your God the way they worship.
DEU 12:5 But you must seek only the place he chooses from all your tribes to establish his name as his place of residence, and you must go there.
DEU 12:6 And there you must take your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the personal offerings you have prepared, your votive offerings, your freewill offerings, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks.
DEU 12:7 Both you and your families must feast there before the Lord your God and rejoice in all the output of your labor with which he has blessed you.
DEU 12:8 You must not do like we are doing here today, with everyone doing what seems best to him,
DEU 12:9 for you have not yet come to the final stop and inheritance the Lord your God is giving you.
DEU 12:10 When you do go across the Jordan River and settle in the land he is granting you as an inheritance and you find relief from all the enemies who surround you, you will live in safety.
DEU 12:11 Then you must come to the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to reside, bringing everything I am commanding you – your burnt offerings, sacrifices, tithes, the personal offerings you have prepared, and all your choice votive offerings which you devote to him.
DEU 12:12 You shall rejoice in the presence of the Lord your God, along with your sons, daughters, male and female servants, and the Levites in your villages (since they have no allotment or inheritance with you).
DEU 12:13 Make sure you do not offer burnt offerings in any place you wish,
DEU 12:14 for you may do so only in the place the Lord chooses in one of your tribal areas – there you may do everything I am commanding you.
DEU 12:15 On the other hand, you may slaughter and eat meat as you please when the Lord your God blesses you in all your villages. Both the ritually pure and impure may eat it, whether it is a gazelle or an ibex.
DEU 12:16 However, you must not eat blood – pour it out on the ground like water.
DEU 12:17 You will not be allowed to eat in your villages your tithe of grain, new wine, olive oil, the firstborn of your herd and flock, any votive offerings you have vowed, or your freewill and personal offerings.
DEU 12:18 Only in the presence of the Lord your God may you eat these, in the place he chooses. This applies to you, your son, your daughter, your male and female servants, and the Levites in your villages. In that place you will rejoice before the Lord your God in all the output of your labor.
DEU 12:19 Be careful not to overlook the Levites as long as you live in the land.
DEU 12:20 When the Lord your God extends your borders as he said he would do and you say, “I want to eat meat just as I please,” you may do so as you wish.
DEU 12:21 If the place he chooses to locate his name is too far for you, you may slaughter any of your herd and flock he has given you just as I have stipulated; you may eat them in your villages just as you wish.
DEU 12:22 Like you eat the gazelle or ibex, so you may eat these; the ritually impure and pure alike may eat them.
DEU 12:23 However, by no means eat the blood, for the blood is life itself – you must not eat the life with the meat!
DEU 12:24 You must not eat it! You must pour it out on the ground like water.
DEU 12:25 You must not eat it so that it may go well with you and your children after you; you will be doing what is right in the Lord’s sight.
DEU 12:26 Only the holy things and votive offerings that belong to you, you must pick up and take to the place the Lord will choose.
DEU 12:27 You must offer your burnt offerings, both meat and blood, on the altar of the Lord your God; the blood of your other sacrifices you must pour out on his altar while you eat the meat.
DEU 12:28 Pay careful attention to all these things I am commanding you so that it may always go well with you and your children after you when you do what is good and right in the sight of the Lord your God.
DEU 12:29 When the Lord your God eliminates the nations from the place where you are headed and you dispossess them, you will settle down in their land.
DEU 12:30 After they have been destroyed from your presence, be careful not to be ensnared like they are; do not pursue their gods and say, “How do these nations serve their gods? I will do the same.”
DEU 12:31 You must not worship the Lord your God the way they do! For everything that is abhorrent to him, everything he hates, they have done when worshiping their gods. They even burn up their sons and daughters before their gods!
DEU 12:32 You must be careful to do everything I am commanding you. Do not add to it or subtract from it!
DEU 13:1 Suppose a prophet or one who foretells by dreams should appear among you and show you a sign or wonder,
DEU 13:2 and the sign or wonder should come to pass concerning what he said to you, namely, “Let us follow other gods” – gods whom you have not previously known – “and let us serve them.”
DEU 13:3 You must not listen to the words of that prophet or dreamer, for the Lord your God will be testing you to see if you love him with all your mind and being.
DEU 13:4 You must follow the Lord your God and revere only him; and you must observe his commandments, obey him, serve him, and remain loyal to him.
DEU 13:5 As for that prophet or dreamer, he must be executed because he encouraged rebellion against the Lord your God who brought you from the land of Egypt, redeeming you from that place of slavery, and because he has tried to entice you from the way the Lord your God has commanded you to go. In this way you must purge out evil from within.
DEU 13:6 Suppose your own full brother, your son, your daughter, your beloved wife, or your closest friend should seduce you secretly and encourage you to go and serve other gods that neither you nor your ancestors have previously known,
DEU 13:7 the gods of the surrounding people (whether near you or far from you, from one end of the earth to the other).
DEU 13:8 You must not give in to him or even listen to him; do not feel sympathy for him or spare him or cover up for him.
DEU 13:9 Instead, you must kill him without fail! Your own hand must be the first to strike him, and then the hands of the whole community.
DEU 13:10 You must stone him to death because he tried to entice you away from the Lord your God, who delivered you from the land of Egypt, that place of slavery.
DEU 13:11 Thus all Israel will hear and be afraid; no longer will they continue to do evil like this among you.
DEU 13:12 Suppose you should hear in one of your cities, which the Lord your God is giving you as a place to live, that
DEU 13:13 some evil people have departed from among you to entice the inhabitants of their cities, saying, “Let’s go and serve other gods” (whom you have not known before).
DEU 13:14 You must investigate thoroughly and inquire carefully. If it is indeed true that such a disgraceful thing is being done among you,
DEU 13:15 you must by all means slaughter the inhabitants of that city with the sword; annihilate with the sword everyone in it, as well as the livestock.
DEU 13:16 You must gather all of its plunder into the middle of the plaza and burn the city and all its plunder as a whole burnt offering to the Lord your God. It will be an abandoned ruin forever – it must never be rebuilt again.
DEU 13:17 You must not take for yourself anything that has been placed under judgment. Then the Lord will relent from his intense anger, show you compassion, have mercy on you, and multiply you as he promised your ancestors.
DEU 13:18 Thus you must obey the Lord your God, keeping all his commandments that I am giving you today and doing what is right before him.
DEU 14:1 You are children of the Lord your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave your forehead bald for the sake of the dead.
DEU 14:2 For you are a people holy to the Lord your God. He has chosen you to be his people, prized above all others on the face of the earth.
DEU 14:3 You must not eat any forbidden thing.
DEU 14:4 These are the animals you may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat,
DEU 14:5 the ibex, the gazelle, the deer, the wild goat, the antelope, the wild oryx, and the mountain sheep.
DEU 14:6 You may eat any animal that has hooves divided into two parts and that chews the cud.
DEU 14:7 However, you may not eat the following animals among those that chew the cud or those that have divided hooves: the camel, the hare, and the rock badger. (Although they chew the cud, they do not have divided hooves and are therefore ritually impure to you).
DEU 14:8 Also the pig is ritually impure to you; though it has divided hooves, it does not chew the cud. You may not eat their meat or even touch their remains.
DEU 14:9 These you may eat from among water creatures: anything with fins and scales you may eat,
DEU 14:10 but whatever does not have fins and scales you may not eat; it is ritually impure to you.
DEU 14:11 All ritually clean birds you may eat.
DEU 14:12 These are the ones you may not eat: the eagle, the vulture, the black vulture,
DEU 14:13 the kite, the black kite, the dayyah after its species,
DEU 14:14 every raven after its species,
DEU 14:15 the ostrich, the owl, the seagull, the falcon after its species,
DEU 14:16 the little owl, the long-eared owl, the white owl,
DEU 14:17 the jackdaw, the carrion vulture, the cormorant,
DEU 14:18 the stork, the heron after its species, the hoopoe, the bat,
DEU 14:19 and any winged thing on the ground are impure to you – they may not be eaten.
DEU 14:20 You may eat any clean bird.
DEU 14:21 You may not eat any corpse, though you may give it to the resident foreigner who is living in your villages and he may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner. You are a people holy to the Lord your God. Do not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
DEU 14:22 You must be certain to tithe all the produce of your seed that comes from the field year after year.
DEU 14:23 In the presence of the Lord your God you must eat from the tithe of your grain, your new wine, your olive oil, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks in the place he chooses to locate his name, so that you may learn to revere the Lord your God always.
DEU 14:24 When he blesses you, if the place where he chooses to locate his name is distant,
DEU 14:25 you may convert the tithe into money, secure the money, and travel to the place the Lord your God chooses for himself.
DEU 14:26 Then you may spend the money however you wish for cattle, sheep, wine, beer, or whatever you desire. You and your household may eat there in the presence of the Lord your God and enjoy it.
DEU 14:27 As for the Levites in your villages, you must not ignore them, for they have no allotment or inheritance along with you.
DEU 14:28 At the end of every three years you must bring all the tithe of your produce, in that very year, and you must store it up in your villages.
DEU 14:29 Then the Levites (because they have no allotment or inheritance with you), the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows of your villages may come and eat their fill so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work you do.
DEU 15:1 At the end of every seven years you must declare a cancellation of debts.
DEU 15:2 This is the nature of the cancellation: Every creditor must remit what he has loaned to another person; he must not force payment from his fellow Israelite, for it is to be recognized as “the Lord’s cancellation of debts.”
DEU 15:3 You may exact payment from a foreigner, but whatever your fellow Israelite owes you, you must remit.
DEU 15:4 However, there should not be any poor among you, for the Lord will surely bless you in the land that he is giving you as an inheritance,
DEU 15:5 if you carefully obey him by keeping all these commandments that I am giving you today.
DEU 15:6 For the Lord your God will bless you just as he has promised; you will lend to many nations but will not borrow from any, and you will rule over many nations but they will not rule over you.
DEU 15:7 If a fellow Israelite from one of your villages in the land that the Lord your God is giving you should be poor, you must not harden your heart or be insensitive to his impoverished condition.
DEU 15:8 Instead, you must be sure to open your hand to him and generously lend him whatever he needs.
DEU 15:9 Be careful lest you entertain the wicked thought that the seventh year, the year of cancellation of debts, has almost arrived, and your attitude be wrong toward your impoverished fellow Israelite and you do not lend him anything; he will cry out to the Lord against you and you will be regarded as having sinned.
DEU 15:10 You must by all means lend to him and not be upset by doing it, for because of this the Lord your God will bless you in all your work and in everything you attempt.
DEU 15:11 There will never cease to be some poor people in the land; therefore, I am commanding you to make sure you open your hand to your fellow Israelites who are needy and poor in your land.
DEU 15:12 If your fellow Hebrew – whether male or female – is sold to you and serves you for six years, then in the seventh year you must let that servant go free.
DEU 15:13 If you set them free, you must not send them away empty-handed.
DEU 15:14 You must supply them generously from your flock, your threshing floor, and your winepress – as the Lord your God has blessed you, you must give to them.
DEU 15:15 Remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you; therefore, I am commanding you to do this thing today.
DEU 15:16 However, if the servant says to you, “I do not want to leave you,” because he loves you and your household, since he is well off with you,
DEU 15:17 you shall take an awl and pierce a hole through his ear to the door. Then he will become your servant permanently (this applies to your female servant as well).
DEU 15:18 You should not consider it difficult to let him go free, for he will have served you for six years, twice the time of a hired worker; the Lord your God will bless you in everything you do.
DEU 15:19 You must set apart for the Lord your God every firstborn male born to your herds and flocks. You must not work the firstborn of your bulls or shear the firstborn of your flocks.
DEU 15:20 You and your household must eat them annually before the Lord your God in the place he chooses.
DEU 15:21 If they have any kind of blemish – lameness, blindness, or anything else – you may not offer them as a sacrifice to the Lord your God.
DEU 15:22 You may eat it in your villages, whether you are ritually impure or clean, just as you would eat a gazelle or an ibex.
DEU 15:23 However, you must not eat its blood; you must pour it out on the ground like water.
DEU 16:1 Observe the month Abib and keep the Passover to the Lord your God, for in that month he brought you out of Egypt by night.
DEU 16:2 You must sacrifice the Passover animal (from the flock or the herd) to the Lord your God in the place where he chooses to locate his name.
DEU 16:3 You must not eat any yeast with it; for seven days you must eat bread made without yeast, symbolic of affliction, for you came out of Egypt hurriedly. You must do this so you will remember for the rest of your life the day you came out of the land of Egypt.
DEU 16:4 There must not be a scrap of yeast within your land for seven days, nor can any of the meat you sacrifice on the evening of the first day remain until the next morning.
DEU 16:5 You may not sacrifice the Passover in just any of your villages that the Lord your God is giving you,
DEU 16:6 but you must sacrifice it in the evening in the place where he chooses to locate his name, at sunset, the time of day you came out of Egypt.
DEU 16:7 You must cook and eat it in the place the Lord your God chooses; you may return the next morning to your tents.
DEU 16:8 You must eat bread made without yeast for six days. The seventh day you are to hold an assembly for the Lord your God; you must not do any work on that day.
DEU 16:9 You must count seven weeks; you must begin to count them from the time you begin to harvest the standing grain.
DEU 16:10 Then you are to celebrate the Festival of Weeks before the Lord your God with the voluntary offering that you will bring, in proportion to how he has blessed you.
DEU 16:11 You shall rejoice before him – you, your son, your daughter, your male and female slaves, the Levites in your villages, the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows among you – in the place where the Lord chooses to locate his name.
DEU 16:12 Furthermore, remember that you were a slave in Egypt, and so be careful to observe these statutes.
DEU 16:13 You must celebrate the Festival of Temporary Shelters for seven days, at the time of the grain and grape harvest.
DEU 16:14 You are to rejoice in your festival, you, your son, your daughter, your male and female slaves, the Levites, the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows who are in your villages.
DEU 16:15 You are to celebrate the festival seven days before the Lord your God in the place he chooses, for he will bless you in all your productivity and in whatever you do; so you will indeed rejoice!
DEU 16:16 Three times a year all your males must appear before the Lord your God in the place he chooses for the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Temporary Shelters; and they must not appear before him empty-handed.
DEU 16:17 Every one of you must give as you are able, according to the blessing of the Lord your God that he has given you.
DEU 16:18 You must appoint judges and civil servants for each tribe in all your villages that the Lord your God is giving you, and they must judge the people fairly.
DEU 16:19 You must not pervert justice or show favor. Do not take a bribe, for bribes blind the eyes of the wise and distort the words of the righteous.
DEU 16:20 You must pursue justice alone so that you may live and inherit the land the Lord your God is giving you.
DEU 16:21 You must not plant any kind of tree as a sacred Asherah pole near the altar of the Lord your God which you build for yourself.
DEU 16:22 You must not erect a sacred pillar, a thing the Lord your God detests.
DEU 17:1 You must not sacrifice to him a bull or sheep that has a blemish or any other defect, because that is considered offensive to the Lord your God.
DEU 17:2 Suppose a man or woman is discovered among you – in one of your villages that the Lord your God is giving you – who sins before the Lord your God and breaks his covenant
DEU 17:3 by serving other gods and worshiping them – the sun, moon, or any other heavenly bodies which I have not permitted you to worship.
DEU 17:4 When it is reported to you and you hear about it, you must investigate carefully. If it is indeed true that such a disgraceful thing is being done in Israel,
DEU 17:5 you must bring to your city gates that man or woman who has done this wicked thing – that very man or woman – and you must stone that person to death.
DEU 17:6 At the testimony of two or three witnesses they must be executed. They cannot be put to death on the testimony of only one witness.
DEU 17:7 The witnesses must be first to begin the execution, and then all the people are to join in afterward. In this way you will purge evil from among you.
DEU 17:8 If a matter is too difficult for you to judge – bloodshed, legal claim, or assault – matters of controversy in your villages – you must leave there and go up to the place the Lord your God chooses.
DEU 17:9 You will go to the Levitical priests and the judge in office in those days and seek a solution; they will render a verdict.
DEU 17:10 You must then do as they have determined at that place the Lord chooses. Be careful to do just as you are taught.
DEU 17:11 You must do what you are instructed, and the verdict they pronounce to you, without fail. Do not deviate right or left from what they tell you.
DEU 17:12 The person who pays no attention to the priest currently serving the Lord your God there, or to the verdict – that person must die, so that you may purge evil from Israel.
DEU 17:13 Then all the people will hear and be afraid, and not be so presumptuous again.
DEU 17:14 When you come to the land the Lord your God is giving you and take it over and live in it and then say, “I will select a king like all the nations surrounding me,”
DEU 17:15 you must select without fail a king whom the Lord your God chooses. From among your fellow citizens you must appoint a king – you may not designate a foreigner who is not one of your fellow Israelites.
DEU 17:16 Moreover, he must not accumulate horses for himself or allow the people to return to Egypt to do so, for the Lord has said you must never again return that way.
DEU 17:17 Furthermore, he must not marry many wives lest his affections turn aside, and he must not accumulate much silver and gold.
DEU 17:18 When he sits on his royal throne he must make a copy of this law on a scroll given to him by the Levitical priests.
DEU 17:19 It must be with him constantly and he must read it as long as he lives, so that he may learn to revere the Lord his God and observe all the words of this law and these statutes and carry them out.
DEU 17:20 Then he will not exalt himself above his fellow citizens or turn from the commandments to the right or left, and he and his descendants will enjoy many years ruling over his kingdom in Israel.
DEU 18:1 The Levitical priests – indeed, the entire tribe of Levi – will have no allotment or inheritance with Israel; they may eat the burnt offerings of the Lord and of his inheritance.
DEU 18:2 They will have no inheritance in the midst of their fellow Israelites; the Lord alone is their inheritance, just as he had told them.
DEU 18:3 This shall be the priests’ fair allotment from the people who offer sacrifices, whether bull or sheep – they must give to the priest the shoulder, the jowls, and the stomach.
DEU 18:4 You must give them the best of your grain, new wine, and olive oil, as well as the best of your wool when you shear your flocks.
DEU 18:5 For the Lord your God has chosen them and their sons from all your tribes to stand and serve in his name permanently.
DEU 18:6 Suppose a Levite comes by his own free will from one of your villages, from any part of Israel where he is living, to the place the Lord chooses
DEU 18:7 and serves in the name of the Lord his God like his fellow Levites who stand there before the Lord.
DEU 18:8 He must eat the same share they do, despite any profits he may gain from the sale of his family’s inheritance.
DEU 18:9 When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you, you must not learn the abhorrent practices of those nations.
DEU 18:10 There must never be found among you anyone who sacrifices his son or daughter in the fire, anyone who practices divination, an omen reader, a soothsayer, a sorcerer,
DEU 18:11 one who casts spells, one who conjures up spirits, a practitioner of the occult, or a necromancer.
DEU 18:12 Whoever does these things is abhorrent to the Lord and because of these detestable things the Lord your God is about to drive them out from before you.
DEU 18:13 You must be blameless before the Lord your God.
DEU 18:14 Those nations that you are about to dispossess listen to omen readers and diviners, but the Lord your God has not given you permission to do such things.
DEU 18:15 The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among you – from your fellow Israelites; you must listen to him.
DEU 18:16 This accords with what happened at Horeb in the day of the assembly. You asked the Lord your God: “Please do not make us hear the voice of the Lord our God any more or see this great fire any more lest we die.”
DEU 18:17 The Lord then said to me, “What they have said is good.
DEU 18:18 I will raise up a prophet like you for them from among their fellow Israelites. I will put my words in his mouth and he will speak to them whatever I command.
DEU 18:19 I will personally hold responsible anyone who then pays no attention to the words that prophet speaks in my name.
DEU 18:20 “But if any prophet presumes to speak anything in my name that I have not authorized him to speak, or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must die.
DEU 18:21 Now if you say to yourselves, ‘How can we tell that a message is not from the Lord?’ –
DEU 18:22 whenever a prophet speaks in my name and the prediction is not fulfilled, then I have not spoken it; the prophet has presumed to speak it, so you need not fear him.”
DEU 19:1 When the Lord your God destroys the nations whose land he is about to give you and you dispossess them and settle in their cities and houses,
DEU 19:2 you must set apart for yourselves three cities in the middle of your land that the Lord your God is giving you as a possession.
DEU 19:3 You shall build a roadway and divide into thirds the whole extent of your land that the Lord your God is providing as your inheritance; anyone who kills another person should flee to the closest of these cities.
DEU 19:4 Now this is the law pertaining to one who flees there in order to live, if he has accidentally killed another without hating him at the time of the accident.
DEU 19:5 Suppose he goes with someone else to the forest to cut wood and when he raises the ax to cut the tree, the ax head flies loose from the handle and strikes his fellow worker so hard that he dies. The person responsible may then flee to one of these cities to save himself.
DEU 19:6 Otherwise the blood avenger will chase after the killer in the heat of his anger, eventually overtake him, and kill him, though this is not a capital case since he did not hate him at the time of the accident.
DEU 19:7 Therefore, I am commanding you to set apart for yourselves three cities.
DEU 19:8 If the Lord your God enlarges your borders as he promised your ancestors and gives you all the land he pledged to them,
DEU 19:9 and then you are careful to observe all these commandments I am giving you today (namely, to love the Lord your God and to always walk in his ways), then you must add three more cities to these three.
DEU 19:10 You must not shed innocent blood in your land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, for that would make you guilty.
DEU 19:11 However, suppose a person hates someone else and stalks him, attacks him, kills him, and then flees to one of these cities.
DEU 19:12 The elders of his own city must send for him and remove him from there to deliver him over to the blood avenger to die.
DEU 19:13 You must not pity him, but purge out the blood of the innocent from Israel, so that it may go well with you.
DEU 19:14 You must not encroach on your neighbor’s property, which will have been defined in the inheritance you will obtain in the land the Lord your God is giving you.
DEU 19:15 A single witness may not testify against another person for any trespass or sin that he commits. A matter may be legally established only on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
DEU 19:16 If a false witness testifies against another person and accuses him of a crime,
DEU 19:17 then both parties to the controversy must stand before the Lord, that is, before the priests and judges who will be in office in those days.
DEU 19:18 The judges will thoroughly investigate the matter, and if the witness should prove to be false and to have given false testimony against the accused,
DEU 19:19 you must do to him what he had intended to do to the accused. In this way you will purge evil from among you.
DEU 19:20 The rest of the people will hear and become afraid to keep doing such evil among you.
DEU 19:21 You must not show pity; the principle will be a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, and a foot for a foot.
DEU 20:1 When you go to war against your enemies and see chariotry and troops who outnumber you, do not be afraid of them, for the Lord your God, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt, is with you.
DEU 20:2 As you move forward for battle, the priest will approach and say to the soldiers,
DEU 20:3 “Listen, Israel! Today you are moving forward to do battle with your enemies. Do not be fainthearted. Do not fear and tremble or be terrified because of them,
DEU 20:4 for the Lord your God goes with you to fight on your behalf against your enemies to give you victory.”
DEU 20:5 Moreover, the officers are to say to the troops, “Who among you has built a new house and not dedicated it? He may go home, lest he die in battle and someone else dedicate it.
DEU 20:6 Or who among you has planted a vineyard and not benefited from it? He may go home, lest he die in battle and someone else benefit from it.
DEU 20:7 Or who among you has become engaged to a woman but has not married her? He may go home, lest he die in battle and someone else marry her.”
DEU 20:8 In addition, the officers are to say to the troops, “Who among you is afraid and fainthearted? He may go home so that he will not make his fellow soldier’s heart as fearful as his own.”
DEU 20:9 Then, when the officers have finished speaking, they must appoint unit commanders to lead the troops.
DEU 20:10 When you approach a city to wage war against it, offer it terms of peace.
DEU 20:11 If it accepts your terms and submits to you, all the people found in it will become your slaves.
DEU 20:12 If it does not accept terms of peace but makes war with you, then you are to lay siege to it.
DEU 20:13 The Lord your God will deliver it over to you and you must kill every single male by the sword.
DEU 20:14 However, the women, little children, cattle, and anything else in the city – all its plunder – you may take for yourselves as spoil. You may take from your enemies the plunder that the Lord your God has given you.
DEU 20:15 This is how you are to deal with all those cities located far from you, those that do not belong to these nearby nations.
DEU 20:16 As for the cities of these peoples that the Lord your God is going to give you as an inheritance, you must not allow a single living thing to survive.
DEU 20:17 Instead you must utterly annihilate them – the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites – just as the Lord your God has commanded you,
DEU 20:18 so that they cannot teach you all the abhorrent ways they worship their gods, causing you to sin against the Lord your God.
DEU 20:19 If you besiege a city for a long time while attempting to capture it, you must not chop down its trees, for you may eat fruit from them and should not cut them down. A tree in the field is not human that you should besiege it!
DEU 20:20 However, you may chop down any tree you know is not suitable for food, and you may use it to build siege works against the city that is making war with you until that city falls.
DEU 21:1 If a homicide victim should be found lying in a field in the land the Lord your God is giving you, and no one knows who killed him,
DEU 21:2 your elders and judges must go out and measure how far it is to the cities in the vicinity of the corpse.
DEU 21:3 Then the elders of the city nearest to the corpse must take from the herd a heifer that has not been worked – that has never pulled with the yoke –
DEU 21:4 and bring the heifer down to a wadi with flowing water, to a valley that is neither plowed nor sown. There at the wadi they are to break the heifer’s neck.
DEU 21:5 Then the Levitical priests will approach (for the Lord your God has chosen them to serve him and to pronounce blessings in his name, and to decide every judicial verdict )
DEU 21:6 and all the elders of that city nearest the corpse must wash their hands over the heifer whose neck was broken in the valley.
DEU 21:7 Then they must proclaim, “Our hands have not spilled this blood, nor have we witnessed the crime.
DEU 21:8 Do not blame your people Israel whom you redeemed, O Lord, and do not hold them accountable for the bloodshed of an innocent person.” Then atonement will be made for the bloodshed.
DEU 21:9 In this manner you will purge out the guilt of innocent blood from among you, for you must do what is right before the Lord.
DEU 21:10 When you go out to do battle with your enemies and the Lord your God allows you to prevail and you take prisoners,
DEU 21:11 if you should see among them an attractive woman whom you wish to take as a wife,
DEU 21:12 you may bring her back to your house. She must shave her head, trim her nails,
DEU 21:13 discard the clothing she was wearing when captured, and stay in your house, lamenting for her father and mother for a full month. After that you may have sexual relations with her and become her husband and she your wife.
DEU 21:14 If you are not pleased with her, then you must let her go where she pleases. You cannot in any case sell her; you must not take advantage of her, since you have already humiliated her.
DEU 21:15 Suppose a man has two wives, one whom he loves more than the other, and they both bear him sons, with the firstborn being the child of the less loved wife.
DEU 21:16 In the day he divides his inheritance he must not appoint as firstborn the son of the favorite wife in place of the other wife’s son who is actually the firstborn.
DEU 21:17 Rather, he must acknowledge the son of the less loved wife as firstborn and give him the double portion of all he has, for that son is the beginning of his father’s procreative power – to him should go the right of the firstborn.
DEU 21:18 If a person has a stubborn, rebellious son who pays no attention to his father or mother, and they discipline him to no avail,
DEU 21:19 his father and mother must seize him and bring him to the elders at the gate of his city.
DEU 21:20 They must declare to the elders of his city, “Our son is stubborn and rebellious and pays no attention to what we say – he is a glutton and drunkard.”
DEU 21:21 Then all the men of his city must stone him to death. In this way you will purge out wickedness from among you, and all Israel will hear about it and be afraid.
DEU 21:22 If a person commits a sin punishable by death and is executed, and you hang the corpse on a tree,
DEU 21:23 his body must not remain all night on the tree; instead you must make certain you bury him that same day, for the one who is left exposed on a tree is cursed by God. You must not defile your land which the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.
DEU 22:1 When you see your neighbor’s ox or sheep going astray, do not ignore it; you must return it without fail to your neighbor.
DEU 22:2 If the owner does not live near you or you do not know who the owner is, then you must corral the animal at your house and let it stay with you until the owner looks for it; then you must return it to him.
DEU 22:3 You shall do the same to his donkey, his clothes, or anything else your neighbor has lost and you have found; you must not refuse to get involved.
DEU 22:4 When you see your neighbor’s donkey or ox fallen along the road, do not ignore it; instead, you must be sure to help him get the animal on its feet again.
DEU 22:5 A woman must not wear men’s clothing, nor should a man dress up in women’s clothing, for anyone who does this is offensive to the Lord your God.
DEU 22:6 If you happen to notice a bird’s nest along the road, whether in a tree or on the ground, and there are chicks or eggs with the mother bird sitting on them, you must not take the mother from the young.
DEU 22:7 You must be sure to let the mother go, but you may take the young for yourself. Do this so that it may go well with you and you may have a long life.
DEU 22:8 If you build a new house, you must construct a guard rail around your roof to avoid being culpable in the event someone should fall from it.
DEU 22:9 You must not plant your vineyard with two kinds of seed; otherwise the entire yield, both of the seed you plant and the produce of the vineyard, will be defiled.
DEU 22:10 You must not plow with an ox and a donkey harnessed together.
DEU 22:11 You must not wear clothing made with wool and linen meshed together.
DEU 22:12 You shall make yourselves tassels for the four corners of the clothing you wear.
DEU 22:13 Suppose a man marries a woman, has sexual relations with her, and then rejects her,
DEU 22:14 accusing her of impropriety and defaming her reputation by saying, “I married this woman but when I had sexual relations with her I discovered she was not a virgin!”
DEU 22:15 Then the father and mother of the young woman must produce the evidence of virginity for the elders of the city at the gate.
DEU 22:16 The young woman’s father must say to the elders, “I gave my daughter to this man and he has rejected her.
DEU 22:17 Moreover, he has raised accusations of impropriety by saying, ‘I discovered your daughter was not a virgin,’ but this is the evidence of my daughter’s virginity!” The cloth must then be spread out before the city’s elders.
DEU 22:18 The elders of that city must then seize the man and punish him.
DEU 22:19 They will fine him one hundred shekels of silver and give them to the young woman’s father, for the man who made the accusation ruined the reputation of an Israelite virgin. She will then become his wife and he may never divorce her as long as he lives.
DEU 22:20 But if the accusation is true and the young woman was not a virgin,
DEU 22:21 the men of her city must bring the young woman to the door of her father’s house and stone her to death, for she has done a disgraceful thing in Israel by behaving like a prostitute while living in her father’s house. In this way you will purge evil from among you.
DEU 22:22 If a man is caught having sexual relations with a married woman both the man who had relations with the woman and the woman herself must die; in this way you will purge evil from Israel.
DEU 22:23 If a virgin is engaged to a man and another man meets her in the city and has sexual relations with her,
DEU 22:24 you must bring the two of them to the gate of that city and stone them to death, the young woman because she did not cry out though in the city and the man because he violated his neighbor’s fiancée; in this way you will purge evil from among you.
DEU 22:25 But if the man came across the engaged woman in the field and overpowered her and raped her, then only the rapist must die.
DEU 22:26 You must not do anything to the young woman – she has done nothing deserving of death. This case is the same as when someone attacks another person and murders him,
DEU 22:27 for the man met her in the field and the engaged woman cried out, but there was no one to rescue her.
DEU 22:28 Suppose a man comes across a virgin who is not engaged and overpowers and rapes her and they are discovered.
DEU 22:29 The man who has raped her must pay her father fifty shekels of silver and she must become his wife because he has violated her; he may never divorce her as long as he lives.
DEU 22:30 A man may not marry his father’s former wife and in this way dishonor his father.
DEU 23:1 A man with crushed or severed genitals may not enter the assembly of the Lord.
DEU 23:2 A person of illegitimate birth may not enter the assembly of the Lord; to the tenth generation no one related to him may do so.
DEU 23:3 An Ammonite or Moabite may not enter the assembly of the Lord; to the tenth generation none of their descendants shall ever do so,
DEU 23:4 for they did not meet you with food and water on the way as you came from Egypt, and furthermore, they hired Balaam son of Beor of Pethor in Aram Naharaim to curse you.
DEU 23:5 But the Lord your God refused to listen to Balaam and changed the curse to a blessing, for the Lord your God loves you.
DEU 23:6 You must not seek peace and prosperity for them through all the ages to come.
DEU 23:7 You must not hate an Edomite, for he is your relative; you must not hate an Egyptian, for you lived as a foreigner in his land.
DEU 23:8 Children of the third generation born to them may enter the assembly of the Lord.
DEU 23:9 When you go out as an army against your enemies, guard yourselves against anything impure.
DEU 23:10 If there is someone among you who is impure because of some nocturnal emission, he must leave the camp; he may not reenter it immediately.
DEU 23:11 When evening arrives he must wash himself with water and then at sunset he may reenter the camp.
DEU 23:12 You are to have a place outside the camp to serve as a latrine.
DEU 23:13 You must have a spade among your other equipment and when you relieve yourself outside you must dig a hole with the spade and then turn and cover your excrement.
DEU 23:14 For the Lord your God walks about in the middle of your camp to deliver you and defeat your enemies for you. Therefore your camp should be holy, so that he does not see anything indecent among you and turn away from you.
DEU 23:15 You must not return an escaped slave to his master when he has run away to you.
DEU 23:16 Indeed, he may live among you in any place he chooses, in whichever of your villages he prefers; you must not oppress him.
DEU 23:17 There must never be a sacred prostitute among the young women of Israel nor a sacred male prostitute among the young men of Israel.
DEU 23:18 You must never bring the pay of a female prostitute or the wage of a male prostitute into the temple of the Lord your God in fulfillment of any vow, for both of these are abhorrent to the Lord your God.
DEU 23:19 You must not charge interest on a loan to your fellow Israelite, whether on money, food, or anything else that has been loaned with interest.
DEU 23:20 You may lend with interest to a foreigner, but not to your fellow Israelite; if you keep this command the Lord your God will bless you in all you undertake in the land you are about to enter to possess.
DEU 23:21 When you make a vow to the Lord your God you must not delay in fulfilling it, for otherwise he will surely hold you accountable as a sinner.
DEU 23:22 If you refrain from making a vow, it will not be sinful.
DEU 23:23 Whatever you vow, you must be careful to do what you have promised, such as what you have vowed to the Lord your God as a freewill offering.
DEU 23:24 When you enter the vineyard of your neighbor you may eat as many grapes as you please, but you must not take away any in a container.
DEU 23:25 When you go into the ripe grain fields of your neighbor you may pluck off the kernels with your hand, but you must not use a sickle on your neighbor’s ripe grain.
DEU 24:1 If a man marries a woman and she does not please him because he has found something offensive in her, then he may draw up a divorce document, give it to her, and evict her from his house.
DEU 24:2 When she has left him she may go and become someone else’s wife.
DEU 24:3 If the second husband rejects her and then divorces her, gives her the papers, and evicts her from his house, or if the second husband who married her dies,
DEU 24:4 her first husband who divorced her is not permitted to remarry her after she has become ritually impure, for that is offensive to the Lord. You must not bring guilt on the land which the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.
DEU 24:5 When a man is newly married, he need not go into the army nor be obligated in any way; he must be free to stay at home for a full year and bring joy to the wife he has married.
DEU 24:6 One must not take either lower or upper millstones as security on a loan, for that is like taking a life itself as security.
DEU 24:7 If a man is found kidnapping a person from among his fellow Israelites, and regards him as mere property and sells him, that kidnapper must die. In this way you will purge evil from among you.
DEU 24:8 Be careful during an outbreak of leprosy to follow precisely all that the Levitical priests instruct you; as I have commanded them, so you should do.
DEU 24:9 Remember what the Lord your God did to Miriam along the way after you left Egypt.
DEU 24:10 When you make any kind of loan to your neighbor, you may not go into his house to claim what he is offering as security.
DEU 24:11 You must stand outside and the person to whom you are making the loan will bring out to you what he is offering as security.
DEU 24:12 If the person is poor you may not use what he gives you as security for a covering.
DEU 24:13 You must by all means return to him at sunset the item he gave you as security so that he may sleep in his outer garment and bless you for it; it will be considered a just deed by the Lord your God.
DEU 24:14 You must not oppress a lowly and poor servant, whether one from among your fellow Israelites or from the resident foreigners who are living in your land and villages.
DEU 24:15 You must pay his wage that very day before the sun sets, for he is poor and his life depends on it. Otherwise he will cry out to the Lord against you, and you will be guilty of sin.
DEU 24:16 Fathers must not be put to death for what their children do, nor children for what their fathers do; each must be put to death for his own sin.
DEU 24:17 You must not pervert justice due a resident foreigner or an orphan, or take a widow’s garment as security for a loan.
DEU 24:18 Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and that the Lord your God redeemed you from there; therefore I am commanding you to do all this.
DEU 24:19 Whenever you reap your harvest in your field and leave some unraked grain there, you must not return to get it; it should go to the resident foreigner, orphan, and widow so that the Lord your God may bless all the work you do.
DEU 24:20 When you beat your olive tree you must not repeat the procedure; the remaining olives belong to the resident foreigner, orphan, and widow.
DEU 24:21 When you gather the grapes of your vineyard you must not do so a second time; they should go to the resident foreigner, orphan, and widow.
DEU 24:22 Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt; therefore, I am commanding you to do all this.
DEU 25:1 If controversy arises between people, they should go to court for judgment. When the judges hear the case, they shall exonerate the innocent but condemn the guilty.
DEU 25:2 Then, if the guilty person is sentenced to a beating, the judge shall force him to lie down and be beaten in his presence with the number of blows his wicked behavior deserves.
DEU 25:3 The judge may sentence him to forty blows, but no more. If he is struck with more than these, you might view your fellow Israelite with contempt.
DEU 25:4 You must not muzzle your ox when it is treading grain.
DEU 25:5 If brothers live together and one of them dies without having a son, the dead man’s wife must not remarry someone outside the family. Instead, her late husband’s brother must go to her, marry her, and perform the duty of a brother-in-law.
DEU 25:6 Then the first son she bears will continue the name of the dead brother, thus preventing his name from being blotted out of Israel.
DEU 25:7 But if the man does not want to marry his brother’s widow, then she must go to the elders at the town gate and say, “My husband’s brother refuses to preserve his brother’s name in Israel; he is unwilling to perform the duty of a brother-in-law to me!”
DEU 25:8 Then the elders of his city must summon him and speak to him. If he persists, saying, “I don’t want to marry her,”
DEU 25:9 then his sister-in-law must approach him in view of the elders, remove his sandal from his foot, and spit in his face. She will then respond, “Thus may it be done to any man who does not maintain his brother’s family line!”
DEU 25:10 His family name will be referred to in Israel as “the family of the one whose sandal was removed.”
DEU 25:11 If two men get into a hand-to-hand fight, and the wife of one of them gets involved to help her husband against his attacker, and she reaches out her hand and grabs his genitals,
DEU 25:12 then you must cut off her hand – do not pity her.
DEU 25:13 You must not have in your bag different stone weights, a heavy and a light one.
DEU 25:14 You must not have in your house different measuring containers, a large and a small one.
DEU 25:15 You must have an accurate and correct stone weight and an accurate and correct measuring container, so that your life may be extended in the land the Lord your God is about to give you.
DEU 25:16 For anyone who acts dishonestly in these ways is abhorrent to the Lord your God.
DEU 25:17 Remember what the Amalekites did to you on your way from Egypt,
DEU 25:18 how they met you along the way and cut off all your stragglers in the rear of the march when you were exhausted and tired; they were unafraid of God.
DEU 25:19 So when the Lord your God gives you relief from all the enemies who surround you in the land he is giving you as an inheritance, you must wipe out the memory of the Amalekites from under heaven – do not forget!
DEU 26:1 When you enter the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and you occupy it and live in it,
DEU 26:2 you must take the first of all the ground’s produce you harvest from the land the Lord your God is giving you, place it in a basket, and go to the place where he chooses to locate his name.
DEU 26:3 You must go to the priest in office at that time and say to him, “I declare today to the Lord your God that I have come into the land that the Lord promised to our ancestors to give us.”
DEU 26:4 The priest will then take the basket from you and set it before the altar of the Lord your God.
DEU 26:5 Then you must affirm before the Lord your God, “A wandering Aramean was my ancestor, and he went down to Egypt and lived there as a foreigner with a household few in number, but there he became a great, powerful, and numerous people.
DEU 26:6 But the Egyptians mistreated and oppressed us, forcing us to do burdensome labor.
DEU 26:7 So we cried out to the Lord, the God of our ancestors, and he heard us and saw our humiliation, toil, and oppression.
DEU 26:8 Therefore the Lord brought us out of Egypt with tremendous strength and power, as well as with great awe-inspiring signs and wonders.
DEU 26:9 Then he brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU 26:10 So now, look! I have brought the first of the ground’s produce that you, Lord, have given me.” Then you must set it down before the Lord your God and worship before him.
DEU 26:11 You will celebrate all the good things that the Lord your God has given you and your family, along with the Levites and the resident foreigners among you.
DEU 26:12 When you finish tithing all your income in the third year (the year of tithing), you must give it to the Levites, the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows so that they may eat to their satisfaction in your villages.
DEU 26:13 Then you shall say before the Lord your God, “I have removed the sacred offering from my house and given it to the Levites, the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows just as you have commanded me. I have not violated or forgotten your commandments.
DEU 26:14 I have not eaten anything when I was in mourning, or removed any of it while ceremonially unclean, or offered any of it to the dead; I have obeyed you and have done everything you have commanded me.
DEU 26:15 Look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you have given us, just as you promised our ancestors – a land flowing with milk and honey.”
DEU 26:16 Today the Lord your God is commanding you to keep these statutes and ordinances, something you must do with all your heart and soul.
DEU 26:17 Today you have declared the Lord to be your God, and that you will walk in his ways, keep his statutes, commandments, and ordinances, and obey him.
DEU 26:18 And today the Lord has declared you to be his special people (as he already promised you) so you may keep all his commandments.
DEU 26:19 Then he will elevate you above all the nations he has made and you will receive praise, fame, and honor. You will be a people holy to the Lord your God, as he has said.
DEU 27:1 Then Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people: “Pay attention to all the commandments I am giving you today.
DEU 27:2 When you cross the Jordan River to the land the Lord your God is giving you, you must erect great stones and cover them with plaster.
DEU 27:3 Then you must inscribe on them all the words of this law when you cross over, so that you may enter the land the Lord your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey just as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, said to you.
DEU 27:4 So when you cross the Jordan you must erect on Mount Ebal these stones about which I am commanding you today, and you must cover them with plaster.
DEU 27:5 Then you must build an altar there to the Lord your God, an altar of stones – do not use an iron tool on them.
DEU 27:6 You must build the altar of the Lord your God with whole stones and offer burnt offerings on it to the Lord your God.
DEU 27:7 Also you must offer fellowship offerings and eat them there, rejoicing before the Lord your God.
DEU 27:8 You must inscribe on the stones all the words of this law, making them clear.”
DEU 27:9 Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel: “Be quiet and pay attention, Israel. Today you have become the people of the Lord your God.
DEU 27:10 You must obey him and keep his commandments and statutes that I am giving you today.”
DEU 27:11 Moreover, Moses commanded the people that day:
DEU 27:12 “The following tribes must stand to bless the people on Mount Gerizim when you cross the Jordan: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin.
DEU 27:13 And these other tribes must stand for the curse on Mount Ebal: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
DEU 27:14 “The Levites will call out to every Israelite with a loud voice:
DEU 27:15 ‘Cursed is the one who makes a carved or metal image – something abhorrent to the Lord, the work of the craftsman – and sets it up in a secret place.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:16 ‘Cursed is the one who disrespects his father and mother.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:17 ‘Cursed is the one who moves his neighbor’s boundary marker.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:18 ‘Cursed is the one who misleads a blind person on the road.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:19 ‘Cursed is the one who perverts justice for the resident foreigner, the orphan, and the widow.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:20 ‘Cursed is the one who has sexual relations with his father’s former wife, for he dishonors his father.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:21 ‘Cursed is the one who commits bestiality.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:22 ‘Cursed is the one who has sexual relations with his sister, the daughter of either his father or mother.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:23 ‘Cursed is the one who has sexual relations with his mother-in-law.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:24 ‘Cursed is the one who kills his neighbor in private.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:25 ‘Cursed is the one who takes a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 27:26 ‘Cursed is the one who refuses to keep the words of this law.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’
DEU 28:1 “If you indeed obey the Lord your God and are careful to observe all his commandments I am giving you today, the Lord your God will elevate you above all the nations of the earth.
DEU 28:2 All these blessings will come to you in abundance if you obey the Lord your God:
DEU 28:3 You will be blessed in the city and blessed in the field.
DEU 28:4 Your children will be blessed, as well as the produce of your soil, the offspring of your livestock, the calves of your herds, and the lambs of your flocks.
DEU 28:5 Your basket and your mixing bowl will be blessed.
DEU 28:6 You will be blessed when you come in and blessed when you go out.
DEU 28:7 The Lord will cause your enemies who attack you to be struck down before you; they will attack you from one direction but flee from you in seven different directions.
DEU 28:8 The Lord will decree blessing for you with respect to your barns and in everything you do – yes, he will bless you in the land he is giving you.
DEU 28:9 The Lord will designate you as his holy people just as he promised you, if you keep his commandments and obey him.
DEU 28:10 Then all the peoples of the earth will see that you belong to the Lord, and they will respect you.
DEU 28:11 The Lord will greatly multiply your children, the offspring of your livestock, and the produce of your soil in the land which he promised your ancestors he would give you.
DEU 28:12 The Lord will open for you his good treasure house, the heavens, to give you rain for the land in its season and to bless all you do; you will lend to many nations but you will not borrow from any.
DEU 28:13 The Lord will make you the head and not the tail, and you will always end up at the top and not at the bottom, if you obey his commandments which I am urging you today to be careful to do.
DEU 28:14 But you must not turn away from all the commandments I am giving you today, to either the right or left, nor pursue other gods and worship them.
DEU 28:15 “But if you ignore the Lord your God and are not careful to keep all his commandments and statutes I am giving you today, then all these curses will come upon you in full force:
DEU 28:16 You will be cursed in the city and cursed in the field.
DEU 28:17 Your basket and your mixing bowl will be cursed.
DEU 28:18 Your children will be cursed, as well as the produce of your soil, the calves of your herds, and the lambs of your flocks.
DEU 28:19 You will be cursed when you come in and cursed when you go out.
DEU 28:20 “The Lord will send on you a curse, confusing you and opposing you in everything you undertake until you are destroyed and quickly perish because of the evil of your deeds, in that you have forsaken me.
DEU 28:21 The Lord will plague you with deadly diseases until he has completely removed you from the land you are about to possess.
DEU 28:22 He will afflict you with weakness, fever, inflammation, infection, sword, blight, and mildew; these will attack you until you perish.
DEU 28:23 The sky above your heads will be bronze and the earth beneath you iron.
DEU 28:24 The Lord will make the rain of your land powder and dust; it will come down on you from the sky until you are destroyed.
DEU 28:25 “The Lord will allow you to be struck down before your enemies; you will attack them from one direction but flee from them in seven directions and will become an object of terror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
DEU 28:26 Your carcasses will be food for every bird of the sky and wild animal of the earth, and there will be no one to chase them off.
DEU 28:27 The Lord will afflict you with the boils of Egypt and with tumors, eczema, and scabies, all of which cannot be healed.
DEU 28:28 The Lord will also subject you to madness, blindness, and confusion of mind.
DEU 28:29 You will feel your way along at noon like the blind person does in darkness and you will not succeed in anything you do; you will be constantly oppressed and continually robbed, with no one to save you.
DEU 28:30 You will be engaged to a woman and another man will rape her. You will build a house but not live in it. You will plant a vineyard but not even begin to use it.
DEU 28:31 Your ox will be slaughtered before your very eyes but you will not eat of it. Your donkey will be stolen from you as you watch and will not be returned to you. Your flock of sheep will be given to your enemies and there will be no one to save you.
DEU 28:32 Your sons and daughters will be given to another people while you look on in vain all day, and you will be powerless to do anything about it.
DEU 28:33 As for the produce of your land and all your labor, a people you do not know will consume it, and you will be nothing but oppressed and crushed for the rest of your lives.
DEU 28:34 You will go insane from seeing all this.
DEU 28:35 The Lord will afflict you in your knees and on your legs with painful, incurable boils – from the soles of your feet to the top of your head.
DEU 28:36 The Lord will force you and your king whom you will appoint over you to go away to a people whom you and your ancestors have not known, and you will serve other gods of wood and stone there.
DEU 28:37 You will become an occasion of horror, a proverb, and an object of ridicule to all the peoples to whom the Lord will drive you.
DEU 28:38 “You will take much seed to the field but gather little harvest, because locusts will consume it.
DEU 28:39 You will plant vineyards and cultivate them, but you will not drink wine or gather in grapes, because worms will eat them.
DEU 28:40 You will have olive trees throughout your territory but you will not anoint yourself with olive oil, because the olives will drop off the trees while still unripe.
DEU 28:41 You will bear sons and daughters but not keep them, because they will be taken into captivity.
DEU 28:42 Whirring locusts will take over every tree and all the produce of your soil.
DEU 28:43 The foreigners who reside among you will become higher and higher over you and you will become lower and lower.
DEU 28:44 They will lend to you but you will not lend to them; they will become the head and you will become the tail!
DEU 28:45 All these curses will fall on you, pursuing and overtaking you until you are destroyed, because you would not obey the Lord your God by keeping his commandments and statutes that he has given you.
DEU 28:46 These curses will be a perpetual sign and wonder with reference to you and your descendants.
DEU 28:47 “Because you have not served the Lord your God joyfully and wholeheartedly with the abundance of everything you have,
DEU 28:48 instead in hunger, thirst, nakedness, and poverty you will serve your enemies whom the Lord will send against you. They will place an iron yoke on your neck until they have destroyed you.
DEU 28:49 The Lord will raise up a distant nation against you, one from the other side of the earth as the eagle flies, a nation whose language you will not understand,
DEU 28:50 a nation of stern appearance that will have no regard for the elderly or pity for the young.
DEU 28:51 They will devour the offspring of your livestock and the produce of your soil until you are destroyed. They will not leave you with any grain, new wine, olive oil, calves of your herds, or lambs of your flocks until they have destroyed you.
DEU 28:52 They will besiege all of your villages until all of your high and fortified walls collapse – those in which you put your confidence throughout the land. They will besiege all your villages throughout the land the Lord your God has given you.
DEU 28:53 You will then eat your own offspring, the flesh of the sons and daughters the Lord your God has given you, because of the severity of the siege by which your enemies will constrict you.
DEU 28:54 The man among you who is by nature tender and sensitive will turn against his brother, his beloved wife, and his remaining children.
DEU 28:55 He will withhold from all of them his children’s flesh that he is eating (since there is nothing else left), because of the severity of the siege by which your enemy will constrict you in your villages.
DEU 28:56 Likewise, the most tender and delicate of your women, who would never think of putting even the sole of her foot on the ground because of her daintiness, will turn against her beloved husband, her sons and daughters,
DEU 28:57 and will secretly eat her afterbirth and her newborn children (since she has nothing else), because of the severity of the siege by which your enemy will constrict you in your villages.
DEU 28:58 “If you refuse to obey all the words of this law, the things written in this scroll, and refuse to fear this glorious and awesome name, the Lord your God,
DEU 28:59 then the Lord will increase your punishments and those of your descendants – great and long-lasting afflictions and severe, enduring illnesses.
DEU 28:60 He will infect you with all the diseases of Egypt that you dreaded, and they will persistently afflict you.
DEU 28:61 Moreover, the Lord will bring upon you every kind of sickness and plague not mentioned in this scroll of commandments, until you have perished.
DEU 28:62 There will be very few of you left, though at one time you were as numerous as the stars in the sky, because you will have disobeyed the Lord your God.
DEU 28:63 This is what will happen: Just as the Lord delighted to do good for you and make you numerous, he will take delight in destroying and decimating you. You will be uprooted from the land you are about to possess.
DEU 28:64 The Lord will scatter you among all nations, from one end of the earth to the other. There you will worship other gods that neither you nor your ancestors have known, gods of wood and stone.
DEU 28:65 Among those nations you will have no rest nor will there be a place of peaceful rest for the soles of your feet, for there the Lord will give you an anxious heart, failing eyesight, and a spirit of despair.
DEU 28:66 Your life will hang in doubt before you; you will be terrified by night and day and will have no certainty of surviving from one day to the next.
DEU 28:67 In the morning you will say, ‘If only it were evening!’ And in the evening you will say, ‘I wish it were morning!’ because of the things you will fear and the things you will see.
DEU 28:68 Then the Lord will make you return to Egypt by ship, over a route I said to you that you would never see again. There you will sell yourselves to your enemies as male and female slaves, but no one will buy you.”
DEU 29:1 These are the words of the covenant that the Lord commanded Moses to make with the people of Israel in the land of Moab, in addition to the covenant he had made with them at Horeb.
DEU 29:2 Moses proclaimed to all Israel as follows: “You have seen all that the Lord did in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, all his servants, and his land.
DEU 29:3 Your eyes have seen the great judgments, those signs and mighty wonders.
DEU 29:4 But to this very day the Lord has not given you an understanding mind, perceptive eyes, or discerning ears!
DEU 29:5 I have led you through the desert for forty years. Your clothing has not worn out nor have your sandals deteriorated.
DEU 29:6 You have eaten no bread and drunk no wine or beer – all so that you might know that I am the Lord your God!
DEU 29:7 When you came to this place King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan came out to make war and we defeated them.
DEU 29:8 Then we took their land and gave it as an inheritance to Reuben, Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh.
DEU 29:9 “Therefore, keep the terms of this covenant and obey them so that you may be successful in everything you do.
DEU 29:10 You are standing today, all of you, before the Lord your God – the heads of your tribes, your elders, your officials, every Israelite man,
DEU 29:11 your infants, your wives, and the foreigners living in your encampment, those who chop wood and those who carry water –
DEU 29:12 so that you may enter by oath into the covenant the Lord your God is making with you today.
DEU 29:13 Today he will affirm that you are his people and that he is your God, just as he promised you and as he swore by oath to your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
DEU 29:14 It is not with you alone that I am making this covenant by oath,
DEU 29:15 but with whoever stands with us here today before the Lord our God as well as those not with us here today.
DEU 29:16 “(For you know how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we crossed through the nations as we traveled.
DEU 29:17 You have seen their detestable things and idols of wood, stone, silver, and gold.)
DEU 29:18 Beware that the heart of no man, woman, clan, or tribe among you turns away from the Lord our God today to pursue and serve the gods of those nations; beware that there is among you no root producing poisonous and bitter fruit.
DEU 29:19 When such a person hears the words of this oath he secretly blesses himself and says, “I will have peace though I continue to walk with a stubborn spirit.” This will destroy the watered ground with the parched.
DEU 29:20 The Lord will be unwilling to forgive him, and his intense anger will rage against that man; all the curses written in this scroll will fall upon him and the Lord will obliterate his name from memory.
DEU 29:21 The Lord will single him out for judgment from all the tribes of Israel according to all the curses of the covenant written in this scroll of the law.
DEU 29:22 The generation to come – your descendants who will rise up after you, as well as the foreigner who will come from distant places – will see the afflictions of that land and the illnesses that the Lord has brought on it.
DEU 29:23 The whole land will be covered with brimstone, salt, and burning debris; it will not be planted nor will it sprout or produce grass. It will resemble the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which the Lord destroyed in his intense anger.
DEU 29:24 Then all the nations will ask, “Why has the Lord done all this to this land? What is this fierce, heated display of anger all about?”
DEU 29:25 Then people will say, “Because they abandoned the covenant of the Lord, the God of their ancestors, which he made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
DEU 29:26 They went and served other gods and worshiped them, gods they did not know and that he did not permit them to worship.
DEU 29:27 That is why the Lord’s anger erupted against this land, bringing on it all the curses written in this scroll.
DEU 29:28 So the Lord has uprooted them from their land in anger, wrath, and great rage and has deported them to another land, as is clear today.”
DEU 29:29 Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but those that are revealed belong to us and our descendants forever, so that we might obey all the words of this law.
DEU 30:1 “When you have experienced all these things, both the blessings and the curses I have set before you, you will reflect upon them in all the nations where the Lord your God has banished you.
DEU 30:2 Then if you and your descendants turn to the Lord your God and obey him with your whole mind and being just as I am commanding you today,
DEU 30:3 the Lord your God will reverse your captivity and have pity on you. He will turn and gather you from all the peoples among whom he has scattered you.
DEU 30:4 Even if your exiles are in the most distant land, from there the Lord your God will gather you and bring you back.
DEU 30:5 Then he will bring you to the land your ancestors possessed and you also will possess it; he will do better for you and multiply you more than he did your ancestors.
DEU 30:6 The Lord your God will also cleanse your heart and the hearts of your descendants so that you may love him with all your mind and being and so that you may live.
DEU 30:7 Then the Lord your God will put all these curses on your enemies, on those who hate you and persecute you.
DEU 30:8 You will return and obey the Lord, keeping all his commandments I am giving you today.
DEU 30:9 The Lord your God will make the labor of your hands abundantly successful and multiply your children, the offspring of your cattle, and the produce of your soil. For the Lord your God will once more rejoice over you to make you prosperous just as he rejoiced over your ancestors,
DEU 30:10 if you obey the Lord your God and keep his commandments and statutes that are written in this scroll of the law. But you must turn to him with your whole mind and being.
DEU 30:11 “This commandment I am giving you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it too remote.
DEU 30:12 It is not in heaven, as though one must say, “Who will go up to heaven to get it for us and proclaim it to us so we may obey it?”
DEU 30:13 And it is not across the sea, as though one must say, “Who will cross over to the other side of the sea and get it for us and proclaim it to us so we may obey it?”
DEU 30:14 For the thing is very near you – it is in your mouth and in your mind so that you can do it.
DEU 30:15 “Look! I have set before you today life and prosperity on the one hand, and death and disaster on the other.
DEU 30:16 What I am commanding you today is to love the Lord your God, to walk in his ways, and to obey his commandments, his statutes, and his ordinances. Then you will live and become numerous and the Lord your God will bless you in the land which you are about to possess.
DEU 30:17 However, if you turn aside and do not obey, but are lured away to worship and serve other gods,
DEU 30:18 I declare to you this very day that you will certainly perish! You will not extend your time in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
DEU 30:19 Today I invoke heaven and earth as a witness against you that I have set life and death, blessing and curse, before you. Therefore choose life so that you and your descendants may live!
DEU 30:20 I also call on you to love the Lord your God, to obey him and be loyal to him, for he gives you life and enables you to live continually in the land the Lord promised to give to your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
DEU 31:1 Then Moses went and spoke these words to all Israel.
DEU 31:2 He said to them, “Today I am a hundred and twenty years old. I am no longer able to get about, and the Lord has said to me, ‘You will not cross the Jordan.’
DEU 31:3 As for the Lord your God, he is about to cross over before you; he will destroy these nations before you and dispossess them. As for Joshua, he is about to cross before you just as the Lord has said.
DEU 31:4 The Lord will do to them just what he did to Sihon and Og, the Amorite kings, and to their land, which he destroyed.
DEU 31:5 The Lord will deliver them over to you and you will do to them according to the whole commandment I have given you.
DEU 31:6 Be strong and courageous! Do not fear or tremble before them, for the Lord your God is the one who is going with you. He will not fail you or abandon you!”
DEU 31:7 Then Moses called out to Joshua in the presence of all Israel, “Be strong and courageous, for you will accompany these people to the land that the Lord promised to give their ancestors, and you will enable them to inherit it.
DEU 31:8 The Lord is indeed going before you – he will be with you; he will not fail you or abandon you. Do not be afraid or discouraged!”
DEU 31:9 Then Moses wrote down this law and gave it to the Levitical priests, who carry the ark of the Lord’s covenant, and to all Israel’s elders.
DEU 31:10 He commanded them: “At the end of seven years, at the appointed time of the cancellation of debts, at the Feast of Temporary Shelters,
DEU 31:11 when all Israel comes to appear before the Lord your God in the place he chooses, you must read this law before them within their hearing.
DEU 31:12 Gather the people – men, women, and children, as well as the resident foreigners in your villages – so they may hear and thus learn about and fear the Lord your God and carefully obey all the words of this law.
DEU 31:13 Then their children, who have not known this law, will also hear about and learn to fear the Lord your God for as long as you live in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”
DEU 31:14 Then the Lord said to Moses, “The day of your death is near. Summon Joshua and present yourselves in the tent of meeting so that I can commission him.” So Moses and Joshua presented themselves in the tent of meeting.
DEU 31:15 The Lord appeared in the tent in a pillar of cloud that stood above the door of the tent.
DEU 31:16 Then the Lord said to Moses, “You are about to die, and then these people will begin to prostitute themselves with the foreign gods of the land into which they are going. They will reject me and break my covenant that I have made with them.
DEU 31:17 At that time my anger will erupt against them and I will abandon them and hide my face from them until they are devoured. Many disasters and distresses will overcome them so that they will say at that time, ‘Have not these disasters overcome us because our God is not among us ?’
DEU 31:18 But I will certainly hide myself at that time because of all the wickedness they will have done by turning to other gods.
DEU 31:19 Now write down for yourselves the following song and teach it to the Israelites. Put it into their very mouths so that this song may serve as my witness against the Israelites!
DEU 31:20 For after I have brought them to the land I promised to their ancestors – one flowing with milk and honey – and they eat their fill and become fat, then they will turn to other gods and worship them; they will reject me and break my covenant.
DEU 31:21 Then when many disasters and distresses overcome them this song will testify against them, for their descendants will not forget it. I know the intentions they have in mind today, even before I bring them to the land I have promised.”
DEU 31:22 So on that day Moses wrote down this song and taught it to the Israelites,
DEU 31:23 and the Lord commissioned Joshua son of Nun, “Be strong and courageous, for you will take the Israelites to the land I have promised them, and I will be with you.”
DEU 31:24 When Moses finished writing on a scroll the words of this law in their entirety,
DEU 31:25 he commanded the Levites who carried the ark of the Lord’s covenant,
DEU 31:26 “Take this scroll of the law and place it beside the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God. It will remain there as a witness against you,
DEU 31:27 for I know about your rebellion and stubbornness. Indeed, even while I have been living among you to this very day, you have rebelled against the Lord; you will be even more rebellious after my death!
DEU 31:28 Gather to me all your tribal elders and officials so I can speak to them directly about these things and call the heavens and the earth to witness against them.
DEU 31:29 For I know that after I die you will totally corrupt yourselves and turn away from the path I have commanded you to walk. Disaster will confront you in the days to come because you will act wickedly before the Lord, inciting him to anger because of your actions.”
DEU 31:30 Then Moses recited the words of this song from start to finish in the hearing of the whole assembly of Israel.
DEU 32:1 Listen, O heavens, and I will speak; hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.
DEU 32:2 My teaching will drop like the rain, my sayings will drip like the dew, as rain drops upon the grass, and showers upon new growth.
DEU 32:3 For I will proclaim the name of the Lord; you must acknowledge the greatness of our God.
DEU 32:4 As for the Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are just. He is a reliable God who is never unjust, he is fair and upright.
DEU 32:5 His people have been unfaithful to him; they have not acted like his children – this is their sin. They are a perverse and deceitful generation.
DEU 32:6 Is this how you repay the Lord, you foolish, unwise people? Is he not your father, your creator? He has made you and established you.
DEU 32:7 Remember the ancient days; bear in mind the years of past generations. Ask your father and he will inform you, your elders, and they will tell you.
DEU 32:8 When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, when he divided up humankind, he set the boundaries of the peoples, according to the number of the heavenly assembly.
DEU 32:9 For the Lord’s allotment is his people, Jacob is his special possession.
DEU 32:10 The Lord found him in a desolate land, in an empty wasteland where animals howl. He continually guarded him and taught him; he continually protected him like the pupil of his eye.
DEU 32:11 Like an eagle that stirs up its nest, that hovers over its young, so the Lord spread out his wings and took him, he lifted him up on his pinions.
DEU 32:12 The Lord alone was guiding him, no foreign god was with him.
DEU 32:13 He enabled him to travel over the high terrain of the land, and he ate of the produce of the fields. He provided honey for him from the cliffs, and olive oil from the hardest of rocks,
DEU 32:14 butter from the herd and milk from the flock, along with the fat of lambs, rams and goats of Bashan, along with the best of the kernels of wheat; and from the juice of grapes you drank wine.
DEU 32:15 But Jeshurun became fat and kicked, you got fat, thick, and stuffed! Then he deserted the God who made him, and treated the Rock who saved him with contempt.
DEU 32:16 They made him jealous with other gods, they enraged him with abhorrent idols.
DEU 32:17 They sacrificed to demons, not God, to gods they had not known; to new gods who had recently come along, gods your ancestors had not known about.
DEU 32:18 You have forgotten the Rock who fathered you, and put out of mind the God who gave you birth.
DEU 32:19 But the Lord took note and despised them because his sons and daughters enraged him.
DEU 32:20 He said, “I will reject them, I will see what will happen to them; for they are a perverse generation, children who show no loyalty.
DEU 32:21 They have made me jealous with false gods, enraging me with their worthless gods; so I will make them jealous with a people they do not recognize, with a nation slow to learn I will enrage them.
DEU 32:22 For a fire has been kindled by my anger, and it burns to lowest Sheol; it consumes the earth and its produce, and ignites the foundations of the mountains.
DEU 32:23 I will increase their disasters, I will use up my arrows on them.
DEU 32:24 They will be starved by famine, eaten by plague, and bitterly stung; I will send the teeth of wild animals against them, along with the poison of creatures that crawl in the dust.
DEU 32:25 The sword will make people childless outside, and terror will do so inside; they will destroy both the young man and the virgin, the infant and the gray-haired man.
DEU 32:26 “I said, ‘I want to cut them in pieces. I want to make people forget they ever existed.
DEU 32:27 But I fear the reaction of their enemies, for their adversaries would misunderstand and say, “Our power is great, and the Lord has not done all this!”’
DEU 32:28 They are a nation devoid of wisdom, and there is no understanding among them.
DEU 32:29 I wish that they were wise and could understand this, and that they could comprehend what will happen to them.”
DEU 32:30 How can one man chase a thousand of them, and two pursue ten thousand; unless their Rock had delivered them up, and the Lord had handed them over?
DEU 32:31 For our enemies’ rock is not like our Rock, as even our enemies concede.
DEU 32:32 For their vine is from the stock of Sodom, and from the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes contain venom, their clusters of grapes are bitter.
DEU 32:33 Their wine is snakes’ poison, the deadly venom of cobras.
DEU 32:34 “Is this not stored up with me?” says the Lord, “Is it not sealed up in my storehouses?
DEU 32:35 I will get revenge and pay them back at the time their foot slips; for the day of their disaster is near, and the impending judgment is rushing upon them!”
DEU 32:36 The Lord will judge his people, and will change his plans concerning his servants; when he sees that their power has disappeared, and that no one is left, whether confined or set free.
DEU 32:37 He will say, “Where are their gods, the rock in whom they sought security,
DEU 32:38 who ate the best of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? Let them rise and help you; let them be your refuge!
DEU 32:39 “See now that I, indeed I, am he!” says the Lord, “and there is no other god besides me. I kill and give life, I smash and I heal, and none can resist my power.
DEU 32:40 For I raise up my hand to heaven, and say, ‘As surely as I live forever,
DEU 32:41 I will sharpen my lightning-like sword, and my hand will grasp hold of the weapon of judgment; I will execute vengeance on my foes, and repay those who hate me!
DEU 32:42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword will devour flesh – the blood of the slaughtered and captured, the chief of the enemy’s leaders!’”
DEU 32:43 Cry out, O nations, with his people, for he will avenge his servants’ blood; he will take vengeance against his enemies, and make atonement for his land and people.
DEU 32:44 Then Moses went with Joshua son of Nun and recited all the words of this song to the people.
DEU 32:45 When Moses finished reciting all these words to all Israel
DEU 32:46 he said to them, “Keep in mind all the words I am solemnly proclaiming to you today; you must command your children to observe carefully all the words of this law.
DEU 32:47 For this is no idle word for you – it is your life! By this word you will live a long time in the land you are about to cross the Jordan to possess.”
DEU 32:48 Then the Lord said to Moses that same day,
DEU 32:49 “Go up to this Abarim hill country, to Mount Nebo (which is in the land of Moab opposite Jericho ) and look at the land of Canaan that I am giving to the Israelites as a possession.
DEU 32:50 You will die on the mountain that you ascend and join your deceased ancestors, just as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and joined his deceased ancestors,
DEU 32:51 for both of you rebelled against me among the Israelites at the waters of Meribah Kadesh in the desert of Zin when you did not show me proper respect among the Israelites.
DEU 32:52 You will see the land before you, but you will not enter the land that I am giving to the Israelites.”
DEU 33:1 This is the blessing Moses the man of God pronounced upon the Israelites before his death.
DEU 33:2 He said: The Lord came from Sinai and revealed himself to Israel from Seir. He appeared in splendor from Mount Paran, and came forth with ten thousand holy ones. With his right hand he gave a fiery law to them.
DEU 33:3 Surely he loves the people; all your holy ones are in your power. And they sit at your feet, each receiving your words.
DEU 33:4 Moses delivered to us a law, an inheritance for the assembly of Jacob.
DEU 33:5 The Lord was king over Jeshurun, when the leaders of the people assembled, the tribes of Israel together.
DEU 33:6 May Reuben live and not die, and may his people multiply.
DEU 33:7 And this is the blessing to Judah. He said, Listen, O Lord, to Judah’s voice, and bring him to his people. May his power be great, and may you help him against his foes.
DEU 33:8 Of Levi he said: Your Thummim and Urim belong to your godly one, whose authority you challenged at Massah, and with whom you argued at the waters of Meribah.
DEU 33:9 He said to his father and mother, “I have not seen him,” and he did not acknowledge his own brothers or know his own children, for they kept your word, and guarded your covenant.
DEU 33:10 They will teach Jacob your ordinances and Israel your law; they will offer incense as a pleasant odor, and a whole offering on your altar.
DEU 33:11 Bless, O Lord, his goods, and be pleased with his efforts; undercut the legs of any who attack him, and of those who hate him, so that they cannot stand.
DEU 33:12 Of Benjamin he said: The beloved of the Lord will live safely by him; he protects him all the time, and the Lord places him on his chest.
DEU 33:13 Of Joseph he said: May the Lord bless his land with the harvest produced by the sky, by the dew, and by the depths crouching beneath;
DEU 33:14 with the harvest produced by the daylight and by the moonlight;
DEU 33:15 with the best of the ancient mountains and the harvest produced by the age-old hills;
DEU 33:16 with the harvest of the earth and its fullness and the pleasure of him who resided in the burning bush. May blessing rest on Joseph’s head, and on the top of the head of the one set apart from his brothers.
DEU 33:17 May the firstborn of his bull bring him honor, and may his horns be those of a wild ox; with them may he gore all peoples, all the far reaches of the earth. They are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.
DEU 33:18 Of Zebulun he said: Rejoice, Zebulun, when you go outside, and Issachar, when you are in your tents.
DEU 33:19 They will summon peoples to the mountain, there they will sacrifice proper sacrifices; for they will enjoy the abundance of the seas, and the hidden treasures of the shores.
DEU 33:20 Of Gad he said: Blessed be the one who enlarges Gad. Like a lioness he will dwell; he will tear at an arm – indeed, a scalp.
DEU 33:21 He has selected the best part for himself, for the portion of the ruler is set aside there; he came with the leaders of the people, he obeyed the righteous laws of the Lord and his ordinances with Israel.
DEU 33:22 Of Dan he said: Dan is a lion’s cub; he will leap forth from Bashan.
DEU 33:23 Of Naphtali he said: O Naphtali, overflowing with favor, and full of the Lord’s blessing, possess the west and south.
DEU 33:24 Of Asher he said: Asher is blessed with children, may he be favored by his brothers and may he dip his foot in olive oil.
DEU 33:25 The bars of your gates will be made of iron and bronze, and may you have lifelong strength.
DEU 33:26 There is no one like God, O Jeshurun, who rides through the sky to help you, on the clouds in majesty.
DEU 33:27 The everlasting God is a refuge, and underneath you are his eternal arms; he has driven out enemies before you, and has said, “Destroy!”
DEU 33:28 Israel lives in safety, the fountain of Jacob is quite secure, in a land of grain and new wine; indeed, its heavens rain down dew.
DEU 33:29 You have joy, Israel! Who is like you? You are a people delivered by the Lord, your protective shield and your exalted sword. May your enemies cringe before you; may you trample on their backs.
DEU 34:1 Then Moses ascended from the deserts of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the summit of Pisgah, which is opposite Jericho. The Lord showed him the whole land – Gilead to Dan,
DEU 34:2 and all of Naphtali, the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the distant sea,
DEU 34:3 the Negev, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of the date palm trees, as far as Zoar.
DEU 34:4 Then the Lord said to him, “This is the land I promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob when I said, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’ I have let you see it, but you will not cross over there.”
DEU 34:5 So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died there in the land of Moab as the Lord had said.
DEU 34:6 He buried him in the land of Moab near Beth Peor, but no one knows his exact burial place to this very day.
DEU 34:7 Moses was 120 years old when he died, but his eye was not dull nor had his vitality departed.
DEU 34:8 The Israelites mourned for Moses in the deserts of Moab for thirty days; then the days of mourning for Moses ended.
DEU 34:9 Now Joshua son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had placed his hands on him; and the Israelites listened to him and did just what the Lord had commanded Moses.
DEU 34:10 No prophet ever again arose in Israel like Moses, who knew the Lord face to face.
DEU 34:11 He did all the signs and wonders the Lord had sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, all his servants, and the whole land,
DEU 34:12 and he displayed great power and awesome might in view of all Israel.
JOS 1:1 After Moses the Lord’s servant died, the Lord said to Joshua son of Nun, Moses’ assistant:
JOS 1:2 “Moses my servant is dead. Get ready! Cross the Jordan River! Lead these people into the land which I am ready to hand over to them.
JOS 1:3 I am handing over to you every place you set foot, as I promised Moses.
JOS 1:4 Your territory will extend from the wilderness in the south to Lebanon in the north. It will extend all the way to the great River Euphrates in the east (including all of Syria) and all the way to the Mediterranean Sea in the west.
JOS 1:5 No one will be able to resist you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will not abandon you or leave you alone.
JOS 1:6 Be strong and brave! You must lead these people in the conquest of this land that I solemnly promised their ancestors I would hand over to them.
JOS 1:7 Make sure you are very strong and brave! Carefully obey all the law my servant Moses charged you to keep! Do not swerve from it to the right or to the left, so that you may be successful in all you do.
JOS 1:8 This law scroll must not leave your lips! You must memorize it day and night so you can carefully obey all that is written in it. Then you will prosper and be successful.
JOS 1:9 I repeat, be strong and brave! Don’t be afraid and don’t panic, for I, the Lord your God, am with you in all you do.”
JOS 1:10 Joshua instructed the leaders of the people:
JOS 1:11 “Go through the camp and command the people, ‘Prepare your supplies, for within three days you will cross the Jordan River and begin the conquest of the land the Lord your God is ready to hand over to you.’”
JOS 1:12 Joshua told the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh:
JOS 1:13 “Remember what Moses the Lord’s servant commanded you. The Lord your God is giving you a place to settle and is handing this land over to you.
JOS 1:14 Your wives, children and cattle may stay in the land that Moses assigned to you east of the Jordan River. But all you warriors must cross over armed for battle ahead of your brothers. You must help them
JOS 1:15 until the Lord gives your brothers a place like yours to settle and they conquer the land the Lord your God is ready to hand over to them. Then you may go back to your allotted land and occupy the land Moses the Lord’s servant assigned you east of the Jordan.”
JOS 1:16 They told Joshua, “We will do everything you say. We will go wherever you send us.
JOS 1:17 Just as we obeyed Moses, so we will obey you. But may the Lord your God be with you as he was with Moses!
JOS 1:18 Any man who rebels against what you say and does not obey all your commands will be executed. But be strong and brave!”
JOS 2:1 Joshua son of Nun sent two spies out from Shittim secretly and instructed them: “Find out what you can about the land, especially Jericho.” They stopped at the house of a prostitute named Rahab and spent the night there.
JOS 2:2 The king of Jericho received this report: “Note well! Israelite men have come here tonight to spy on the land.”
JOS 2:3 So the king of Jericho sent this order to Rahab: “Turn over the men who came to you – the ones who came to your house – for they have come to spy on the whole land!”
JOS 2:4 But the woman hid the two men and replied, “Yes, these men were clients of mine, but I didn’t know where they came from.
JOS 2:5 When it was time to shut the city gate for the night, the men left. I don’t know where they were heading. Chase after them quickly, for you have time to catch them!”
JOS 2:6 (Now she had taken them up to the roof and had hidden them in the stalks of flax she had spread out on the roof.)
JOS 2:7 Meanwhile the king’s men tried to find them on the road to the Jordan River near the fords. The city gate was shut as soon as they set out in pursuit of them.
JOS 2:8 Now before the spies went to sleep, Rahab went up to the roof.
JOS 2:9 She said to the men, “I know the Lord is handing this land over to you. We are absolutely terrified of you, and all who live in the land are cringing before you.
JOS 2:10 For we heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea before you when you left Egypt and how you annihilated the two Amorite kings, Sihon and Og, on the other side of the Jordan.
JOS 2:11 When we heard the news we lost our courage and no one could even breathe for fear of you. For the Lord your God is God in heaven above and on earth below!
JOS 2:12 So now, promise me this with an oath sworn in the Lord’s name. Because I have shown allegiance to you, show allegiance to my family. Give me a solemn pledge
JOS 2:13 that you will spare the lives of my father, mother, brothers, sisters, and all who belong to them, and rescue us from death.”
JOS 2:14 The men said to her, “If you die, may we die too! If you do not report what we’ve been up to, then, when the Lord hands the land over to us, we will show unswerving allegiance to you.”
JOS 2:15 Then Rahab let them down by a rope through the window. (Her house was built as part of the city wall; she lived in the wall.)
JOS 2:16 She told them, “Head to the hill country, so the ones chasing you don’t find you. Hide from them there for three days, long enough for those chasing you to return. Then you can be on your way.”
JOS 2:17 The men said to her, “We are not bound by this oath you made us swear unless the following conditions are met:
JOS 2:18 When we invade the land , tie this red rope in the window through which you let us down, and gather together in your house your father, mother, brothers, and all who live in your father’s house.
JOS 2:19 Anyone who leaves your house will be responsible for his own death – we are innocent in that case! But if anyone with you in the house is harmed, we will be responsible.
JOS 2:20 If you should report what we’ve been up to, we are not bound by this oath you made us swear.”
JOS 2:21 She said, “I agree to these conditions.” She sent them on their way and then tied the red rope in the window.
JOS 2:22 They went to the hill country and stayed there for three days, long enough for those chasing them to return. Their pursuers looked all along the way but did not find them.
JOS 2:23 Then the two men returned – they came down from the hills, crossed the river, came to Joshua son of Nun, and reported to him all they had discovered.
JOS 2:24 They told Joshua, “Surely the Lord is handing over all the land to us! All who live in the land are cringing before us!”
JOS 3:1 Bright and early the next morning Joshua and the Israelites left Shittim and came to the Jordan. They camped there before crossing the river.
JOS 3:2 After three days the leaders went through the camp
JOS 3:3 and commanded the people: “When you see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God being carried by the Levitical priests, you must leave here and walk behind it.
JOS 3:4 But stay about three thousand feet behind it. Keep your distance so you can see which way you should go, for you have not traveled this way before.”
JOS 3:5 Joshua told the people, “Ritually consecrate yourselves, for tomorrow the Lord will perform miraculous deeds among you.”
JOS 3:6 Joshua told the priests, “Pick up the ark of the covenant and pass on ahead of the people.” So they picked up the ark of the covenant and went ahead of the people.
JOS 3:7 The Lord told Joshua, “This very day I will begin to honor you before all Israel so they will know that I am with you just as I was with Moses.
JOS 3:8 Instruct the priests carrying the ark of the covenant, ‘When you reach the bank of the Jordan River, wade into the water.’”
JOS 3:9 Joshua told the Israelites, “Come here and listen to the words of the Lord your God!”
JOS 3:10 Joshua continued, “This is how you will know the living God is among you and that he will truly drive out before you the Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites, and Jebusites.
JOS 3:11 Look! The ark of the covenant of the Ruler of the whole earth is ready to enter the Jordan ahead of you.
JOS 3:12 Now select for yourselves twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one per tribe.
JOS 3:13 When the feet of the priests carrying the ark of the Lord, the Ruler of the whole earth, touch the water of the Jordan, the water coming downstream toward you will stop flowing and pile up.”
JOS 3:14 So when the people left their tents to cross the Jordan, the priests carrying the ark of the covenant went ahead of them.
JOS 3:15 When the ones carrying the ark reached the Jordan and the feet of the priests carrying the ark touched the surface of the water – (the Jordan is at flood stage all during harvest time) –
JOS 3:16 the water coming downstream toward them stopped flowing. It piled up far upstream at Adam (the city near Zarethan); there was no water at all flowing to the sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea). The people crossed the river opposite Jericho.
JOS 3:17 The priests carrying the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firmly on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan. All Israel crossed over on dry ground until the entire nation was on the other side.
JOS 4:1 When the entire nation was on the other side, the Lord told Joshua,
JOS 4:2 “Select for yourselves twelve men from the people, one per tribe.
JOS 4:3 Instruct them, ‘Pick up twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan, from the very place where the priests stand firmly, and carry them over with you and put them in the place where you camp tonight.’”
JOS 4:4 Joshua summoned the twelve men he had appointed from the Israelites, one per tribe.
JOS 4:5 Joshua told them, “Go in front of the ark of the Lord your God to the middle of the Jordan. Each of you is to put a stone on his shoulder, according to the number of the Israelite tribes.
JOS 4:6 The stones will be a reminder to you. When your children ask someday, ‘Why are these stones important to you?’
JOS 4:7 tell them how the water of the Jordan stopped flowing before the ark of the covenant of the Lord. When it crossed the Jordan, the water of the Jordan stopped flowing. These stones will be a lasting memorial for the Israelites.”
JOS 4:8 The Israelites did just as Joshua commanded. They picked up twelve stones, according to the number of the Israelite tribes, from the middle of the Jordan as the Lord had instructed Joshua. They carried them over with them to the camp and put them there.
JOS 4:9 Joshua also set up twelve stones in the middle of the Jordan in the very place where the priests carrying the ark of the covenant stood. They remain there to this very day.
JOS 4:10 Now the priests carrying the ark of the covenant were standing in the middle of the Jordan until everything the Lord had commanded Joshua to tell the people was accomplished, in accordance with all that Moses had commanded Joshua. The people went across quickly,
JOS 4:11 and when all the people had finished crossing, the ark of the Lord and the priests crossed as the people looked on.
JOS 4:12 The Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh crossed over armed for battle ahead of the Israelites, just as Moses had instructed them.
JOS 4:13 About forty thousand battle-ready troops marched past the Lord to fight on the plains of Jericho.
JOS 4:14 That day the Lord brought honor to Joshua before all Israel. They respected him all his life, just as they had respected Moses.
JOS 4:15 The Lord told Joshua,
JOS 4:16 “Instruct the priests carrying the ark of the covenantal laws to come up from the Jordan.”
JOS 4:17 So Joshua instructed the priests, “Come up from the Jordan!”
JOS 4:18 The priests carrying the ark of the covenant of the Lord came up from the middle of the Jordan, and as soon as they set foot on dry land, the water of the Jordan flowed again and returned to flood stage.
JOS 4:19 The people went up from the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month and camped in Gilgal on the eastern border of Jericho.
JOS 4:20 Now Joshua set up in Gilgal the twelve stones they had taken from the Jordan.
JOS 4:21 He told the Israelites, “When your children someday ask their fathers, ‘What do these stones represent?’
JOS 4:22 explain to your children, ‘Israel crossed the Jordan River on dry ground.’
JOS 4:23 For the Lord your God dried up the water of the Jordan before you while you crossed over. It was just like when the Lord your God dried up the Red Sea before us while we crossed it.
JOS 4:24 He has done this so all the nations of the earth might recognize the Lord’s power and so you might always obey the Lord your God.”
JOS 5:1 When all the Amorite kings on the west side of the Jordan and all the Canaanite kings along the seacoast heard how the Lord had dried up the water of the Jordan before the Israelites while they crossed, they lost their courage and could not even breathe for fear of the Israelites.
JOS 5:2 At that time the Lord told Joshua, “Make flint knives and circumcise the Israelites once again.”
JOS 5:3 So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the Israelites on the Hill of the Foreskins.
JOS 5:4 This is why Joshua had to circumcise them: All the men old enough to fight when they left Egypt died on the journey through the desert after they left Egypt.
JOS 5:5 Now all the men who left were circumcised, but all the sons born on the journey through the desert after they left Egypt were uncircumcised.
JOS 5:6 Indeed, for forty years the Israelites traveled through the desert until all the men old enough to fight when they left Egypt, the ones who had disobeyed the Lord, died off. For the Lord had sworn a solemn oath to them that he would not let them see the land he had sworn on oath to give them, a land rich in milk and honey.
JOS 5:7 He replaced them with their sons, whom Joshua circumcised. They were uncircumcised; their fathers had not circumcised them along the way.
JOS 5:8 When all the men had been circumcised, they stayed there in the camp until they had healed.
JOS 5:9 The Lord said to Joshua, “Today I have taken away the disgrace of Egypt from you.” So that place is called Gilgal even to this day.
JOS 5:10 So the Israelites camped in Gilgal and celebrated the Passover in the evening of the fourteenth day of the month on the plains of Jericho.
JOS 5:11 They ate some of the produce of the land the day after the Passover, including unleavened bread and roasted grain.
JOS 5:12 The manna stopped appearing the day they ate some of the produce of the land; the Israelites never ate manna again.
JOS 5:13 When Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him holding a drawn sword. Joshua approached him and asked him, “Are you on our side or allied with our enemies?”
JOS 5:14 He answered, “Truly I am the commander of the Lord’s army. Now I have arrived!” Joshua bowed down with his face to the ground and asked, “What does my master want to say to his servant?”
JOS 5:15 The commander of the Lord’s army answered Joshua, “Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you stand is holy.” Joshua did so.
JOS 6:1 Now Jericho was shut tightly because of the Israelites. No one was allowed to leave or enter.
JOS 6:2 The Lord told Joshua, “See, I am about to defeat Jericho for you, along with its king and its warriors.
JOS 6:3 Have all the warriors march around the city one time; do this for six days.
JOS 6:4 Have seven priests carry seven rams’ horns in front of the ark. On the seventh day march around the city seven times, while the priests blow the horns.
JOS 6:5 When you hear the signal from the ram’s horn, have the whole army give a loud battle cry. Then the city wall will collapse and the warriors should charge straight ahead.”
JOS 6:6 So Joshua son of Nun summoned the priests and instructed them, “Pick up the ark of the covenant, and seven priests must carry seven rams’ horns in front of the ark of the Lord.”
JOS 6:7 And he told the army, “Move ahead and march around the city, with armed troops going ahead of the ark of the Lord.”
JOS 6:8 When Joshua gave the army its orders, the seven priests carrying the seven rams’ horns before the Lord moved ahead and blew the horns as the ark of the covenant of the Lord followed behind.
JOS 6:9 Armed troops marched ahead of the priests blowing the horns, while the rear guard followed along behind the ark blowing rams’ horns.
JOS 6:10 Now Joshua had instructed the army, “Do not give a battle cry or raise your voices; say nothing until the day I tell you, ‘Give the battle cry.’ Then give the battle cry!”
JOS 6:11 So Joshua made sure they marched the ark of the Lord around the city one time. Then they went back to the camp and spent the night there.
JOS 6:12 Bright and early the next morning Joshua had the priests pick up the ark of the Lord.
JOS 6:13 The seven priests carrying the seven rams’ horns before the ark of the Lord marched along blowing their horns. Armed troops marched ahead of them, while the rear guard followed along behind the ark of the Lord blowing rams’ horns.
JOS 6:14 They marched around the city one time on the second day, then returned to the camp. They did this six days in all.
JOS 6:15 On the seventh day they were up at the crack of dawn and marched around the city as before – only this time they marched around it seven times.
JOS 6:16 The seventh time around, the priests blew the rams’ horns and Joshua told the army, “Give the battle cry, for the Lord is handing the city over to you!
JOS 6:17 The city and all that is in it must be set apart for the Lord, except for Rahab the prostitute and all who are with her in her house, because she hid the spies we sent.
JOS 6:18 But be careful when you are setting apart the riches for the Lord. If you take any of it, you will make the Israelite camp subject to annihilation and cause a disaster.
JOS 6:19 All the silver and gold, as well as bronze and iron items, belong to the Lord. They must go into the Lord’s treasury.”
JOS 6:20 The rams’ horns sounded and when the army heard the signal, they gave a loud battle cry. The wall collapsed and the warriors charged straight ahead into the city and captured it.
JOS 6:21 They annihilated with the sword everything that breathed in the city, including men and women, young and old, as well as cattle, sheep, and donkeys.
JOS 6:22 Joshua told the two men who had spied on the land, “Enter the prostitute’s house and bring out the woman and all who belong to her as you promised her.”
JOS 6:23 So the young spies went and brought out Rahab, her father, mother, brothers, and all who belonged to her. They brought out her whole family and took them to a place outside the Israelite camp.
JOS 6:24 But they burned the city and all that was in it, except for the silver, gold, and bronze and iron items they put in the treasury of the Lord’s house.
JOS 6:25 Yet Joshua spared Rahab the prostitute, her father’s family, and all who belonged to her. She lives in Israel to this very day because she hid the messengers Joshua sent to spy on Jericho.
JOS 6:26 At that time Joshua made this solemn declaration: “The man who attempts to rebuild this city of Jericho will stand condemned before the Lord. He will lose his firstborn son when he lays its foundations and his youngest son when he erects its gates!”
JOS 6:27 The Lord was with Joshua and he became famous throughout the land.
JOS 7:1 But the Israelites disobeyed the command about the city’s riches. Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, from the tribe of Judah, stole some of the riches. The Lord was furious with the Israelites.
JOS 7:2 Joshua sent men from Jericho ) and instructed them, “Go up and spy on the land.” So the men went up and spied on Ai.
JOS 7:3 They returned and reported to Joshua, “Don’t send the whole army. About two or three thousand men are adequate to defeat Ai. Don’t tire out the whole army, for Ai is small.”
JOS 7:4 So about three thousand men went up, but they fled from the men of Ai.
JOS 7:5 The men of Ai killed about thirty-six of them and chased them from in front of the city gate all the way to the fissures and defeated them on the steep slope. The people’s courage melted away like water.
JOS 7:6 Joshua tore his clothes; he and the leaders of Israel lay face down on the ground before the ark of the Lord until evening and threw dirt on their heads.
JOS 7:7 Joshua prayed, “O, Master, Lord! Why did you bring these people across the Jordan to hand us over to the Amorites so they could destroy us?
JOS 7:8 If only we had been satisfied to live on the other side of the Jordan! O Lord, what can I say now that Israel has retreated before its enemies?
JOS 7:9 When the Canaanites and all who live in the land hear about this, they will turn against us and destroy the very memory of us from the earth. What will you do to protect your great reputation?”
JOS 7:10 The Lord responded to Joshua, “Get up! Why are you lying there face down?
JOS 7:11 Israel has sinned; they have violated my covenantal commandment! They have taken some of the riches; they have stolen them and deceitfully put them among their own possessions.
JOS 7:12 The Israelites are unable to stand before their enemies; they retreat because they have become subject to annihilation. I will no longer be with you, unless you destroy what has contaminated you.
JOS 7:13 Get up! Ritually consecrate the people and tell them this: ‘Ritually consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, because the Lord God of Israel says, “You are contaminated, O Israel! You will not be able to stand before your enemies until you remove what is contaminating you.”
JOS 7:14 In the morning you must approach in tribal order. The tribe the Lord selects must approach by clans. The clan the Lord selects must approach by families. The family the Lord selects must approach man by man.
JOS 7:15 The one caught with the riches must be burned up along with all who belong to him, because he violated the Lord’s covenant and did such a disgraceful thing in Israel.’”
JOS 7:16 Bright and early the next morning Joshua made Israel approach in tribal order and the tribe of Judah was selected.
JOS 7:17 He then made the clans of Judah approach and the clan of the Zerahites was selected. He made the clan of the Zerahites approach and Zabdi was selected.
JOS 7:18 He then made Zabdi’s family approach man by man and Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, from the tribe of Judah, was selected.
JOS 7:19 So Joshua said to Achan, “My son, honor the Lord God of Israel and give him praise! Tell me what you did; don’t hide anything from me!”
JOS 7:20 Achan told Joshua, “It is true. I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel in this way:
JOS 7:21 I saw among the goods we seized a nice robe from Babylon, two hundred silver pieces, and a bar of gold weighing fifty shekels. I wanted them, so I took them. They are hidden in the ground right in the middle of my tent with the silver underneath.”
JOS 7:22 Joshua sent messengers who ran to the tent. The things were hidden right in his tent, with the silver underneath.
JOS 7:23 They took it all from the middle of the tent, brought it to Joshua and all the Israelites, and placed it before the Lord.
JOS 7:24 Then Joshua and all Israel took Achan, son of Zerah, along with the silver, the robe, the bar of gold, his sons, daughters, ox, donkey, sheep, tent, and all that belonged to him and brought them up to the Valley of Disaster.
JOS 7:25 Joshua said, “Why have you brought disaster on us? The Lord will bring disaster on you today!” All Israel stoned him to death. (They also stoned and burned the others.)
JOS 7:26 Then they erected over him a large pile of stones (it remains to this very day ) and the Lord’s anger subsided. So that place is called the Valley of Disaster to this very day.
JOS 8:1 The Lord told Joshua, “Don’t be afraid and don’t panic! Take the whole army with you and march against Ai! See, I am handing over to you the king of Ai, along with his people, city, and land.
JOS 8:2 Do to Ai and its king what you did to Jericho and its king, except you may plunder its goods and cattle. Set an ambush behind the city!”
JOS 8:3 Joshua and the whole army marched against Ai. Joshua selected thirty thousand brave warriors and sent them out at night.
JOS 8:4 He told them, “Look, set an ambush behind the city. Don’t go very far from the city; all of you be ready!
JOS 8:5 I and all the troops who are with me will approach the city. When they come out to fight us like before, we will retreat from them.
JOS 8:6 They will attack us until we have lured them from the city, for they will say, ‘They are retreating from us like before.’ We will retreat from them.
JOS 8:7 Then you rise up from your hiding place and seize the city. The Lord your God will hand it over to you.
JOS 8:8 When you capture the city, set it on fire. Do as the Lord says! See, I have given you orders.”
JOS 8:9 Joshua sent them away and they went to their hiding place west of Ai, between Bethel and Ai. Joshua spent that night with the army.
JOS 8:10 Bright and early the next morning Joshua gathered the army, and he and the leaders of Israel marched at the head of it to Ai.
JOS 8:11 All the troops that were with him marched up and drew near the city. They camped north of Ai on the other side of the valley.
JOS 8:12 He took five thousand men and set an ambush west of the city between Bethel and Ai.
JOS 8:13 The army was in position – the main army north of the city and the rear guard west of the city. That night Joshua went into the middle of the valley.
JOS 8:14 When the king of Ai saw Israel, he and his whole army quickly got up the next day and went out to fight Israel at the meeting place near the Arabah. But he did not realize men were hiding behind the city.
JOS 8:15 Joshua and all Israel pretended to be defeated by them and they retreated along the way to the desert.
JOS 8:16 All the reinforcements in Ai were ordered to chase them; they chased Joshua and were lured away from the city.
JOS 8:17 No men were left in Ai or Bethel; they all went out after Israel. They left the city wide open and chased Israel.
JOS 8:18 The Lord told Joshua, “Hold out toward Ai the curved sword in your hand, for I am handing the city over to you.” So Joshua held out toward Ai the curved sword in his hand.
JOS 8:19 When he held out his hand, the men waiting in ambush rose up quickly from their place and attacked. They entered the city, captured it, and immediately set it on fire.
JOS 8:20 When the men of Ai turned around, they saw the smoke from the city ascending into the sky and were so shocked they were unable to flee in any direction. In the meantime the men who were retreating to the desert turned against their pursuers.
JOS 8:21 When Joshua and all Israel saw that the men in ambush had captured the city and that the city was going up in smoke, they turned around and struck down the men of Ai.
JOS 8:22 At the same time the men who had taken the city came out to fight, and the men of Ai were trapped in the middle. The Israelites struck them down, leaving no survivors or refugees.
JOS 8:23 But they captured the king of Ai alive and brought him to Joshua.
JOS 8:24 When Israel had finished killing all the men of Ai who had chased them toward the desert (they all fell by the sword), all Israel returned to Ai and put the sword to it.
JOS 8:25 Twelve thousand men and women died that day, including all the men of Ai.
JOS 8:26 Joshua kept holding out his curved sword until Israel had annihilated all who lived in Ai.
JOS 8:27 But Israel did plunder the cattle and the goods of the city, in accordance with the Lord’s orders to Joshua.
JOS 8:28 Joshua burned Ai and made it a permanently uninhabited mound (it remains that way to this very day).
JOS 8:29 He hung the king of Ai on a tree, leaving him exposed until evening. At sunset Joshua ordered that his corpse be taken down from the tree. They threw it down at the entrance of the city gate and erected over it a large pile of stones (it remains to this very day).
JOS 8:30 Then Joshua built an altar for the Lord God of Israel on Mount Ebal,
JOS 8:31 just as Moses the Lord’s servant had commanded the Israelites. As described in the law scroll of Moses, it was made with uncut stones untouched by an iron tool. They offered burnt sacrifices on it and sacrificed tokens of peace.
JOS 8:32 There, in the presence of the Israelites, Joshua inscribed on the stones a duplicate of the law written by Moses.
JOS 8:33 All the people, rulers, leaders, and judges were standing on either side of the ark, in front of the Levitical priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord. Both resident foreigners and native Israelites were there. Half the people stood in front of Mount Gerizim and the other half in front of Mount Ebal, as Moses the Lord’s servant had previously instructed to them to do for the formal blessing ceremony.
JOS 8:34 Then Joshua read aloud all the words of the law, including the blessings and the curses, just as they are written in the law scroll.
JOS 8:35 Joshua read aloud every commandment Moses had given before the whole assembly of Israel, including the women, children, and resident foreigners who lived among them.
JOS 9:1 When the news reached all the kings on the west side of the Jordan – in the hill country, the lowlands, and all along the Mediterranean coast as far as Lebanon (including the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites) –
JOS 9:2 they formed an alliance to fight against Joshua and Israel.
JOS 9:3 When the residents of Gibeon heard what Joshua did to Jericho and Ai,
JOS 9:4 they did something clever. They collected some provisions and put worn-out sacks on their donkeys, along with worn-out wineskins that were ripped and patched.
JOS 9:5 They had worn-out, patched sandals on their feet and dressed in worn-out clothes. All their bread was dry and hard.
JOS 9:6 They came to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal and said to him and the men of Israel, “We have come from a distant land. Make a treaty with us.”
JOS 9:7 The men of Israel said to the Hivites, “Perhaps you live near us. So how can we make a treaty with you?”
JOS 9:8 But they said to Joshua, “We are willing to be your subjects.” So Joshua said to them, “Who are you and where do you come from?”
JOS 9:9 They told him, “Your subjects have come from a very distant land because of the reputation of the Lord your God, for we have heard the news about all he did in Egypt
JOS 9:10 and all he did to the two Amorite kings on the other side of the Jordan – King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan in Ashtaroth.
JOS 9:11 Our leaders and all who live in our land told us, ‘Take provisions for your journey and go meet them. Tell them, “We are willing to be your subjects. Make a treaty with us.”’
JOS 9:12 This bread of ours was warm when we packed it in our homes the day we started out to meet you, but now it is dry and hard.
JOS 9:13 These wineskins we filled were brand new, but look how they have ripped. Our clothes and sandals have worn out because it has been a very long journey.”
JOS 9:14 The men examined some of their provisions, but they failed to ask the Lord’s advice.
JOS 9:15 Joshua made a peace treaty with them and agreed to let them live. The leaders of the community sealed it with an oath.
JOS 9:16 Three days after they made the treaty with them, the Israelites found out they were from the local area and lived nearby.
JOS 9:17 So the Israelites set out and on the third day arrived at their cities – Gibeon, Kephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath Jearim.
JOS 9:18 The Israelites did not attack them because the leaders of the community had sworn an oath to them in the name of the Lord God of Israel. The whole community criticized the leaders,
JOS 9:19 but all the leaders told the whole community, “We swore an oath to them in the name of the Lord God of Israel. So now we can’t hurt them!
JOS 9:20 We must let them live so we can escape the curse attached to the oath we swore to them.”
JOS 9:21 The leaders then added, “Let them live.” So they became woodcutters and water carriers for the whole community, as the leaders had decided.
JOS 9:22 Joshua summoned the Gibeonites and said to them, “Why did you trick us by saying, ‘We live far away from you,’ when you really live nearby?
JOS 9:23 Now you are condemned to perpetual servitude as woodcutters and water carriers for the house of my God.”
JOS 9:24 They said to Joshua, “It was carefully reported to your subjects how the Lord your God commanded Moses his servant to assign you the whole land and to destroy all who live in the land from before you. Because of you we were terrified we would lose our lives, so we did this thing.
JOS 9:25 So now we are in your power. Do to us what you think is good and appropriate.
JOS 9:26 Joshua did as they said; he kept the Israelites from killing them
JOS 9:27 and that day made them woodcutters and water carriers for the community and for the altar of the Lord at the divinely chosen site. (They continue in that capacity to this very day.)
JOS 10:1 Adoni-Zedek, king of Jerusalem, and its king. He also heard how the people of Gibeon made peace with Israel and lived among them.
JOS 10:2 All Jerusalem was terrified because Gibeon was a large city, like one of the royal cities. It was larger than Ai and all its men were warriors.
JOS 10:3 So King Adoni-Zedek of Jerusalem sent this message to King Hoham of Hebron, King Piram of Jarmuth, King Japhia of Lachish, and King Debir of Eglon:
JOS 10:4 “Come to my aid so we can attack Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.”
JOS 10:5 So the five Amorite kings (the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon) and all their troops gathered together and advanced. They deployed their troops and fought against Gibeon.
JOS 10:6 The men of Gibeon sent this message to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal, “Do not abandon your subjects! Rescue us! Help us! For all the Amorite kings living in the hill country are attacking us.”
JOS 10:7 So Joshua and his whole army, including the bravest warriors, marched up from Gilgal.
JOS 10:8 The Lord told Joshua, “Don’t be afraid of them, for I am handing them over to you. Not one of them can resist you.”
JOS 10:9 Joshua attacked them by surprise after marching all night from Gilgal.
JOS 10:10 The Lord routed them before Israel. Israel thoroughly defeated them at Gibeon. They chased them up the road to the pass of Beth Horon and struck them down all the way to Azekah and Makkedah.
JOS 10:11 As they fled from Israel on the slope leading down from Beth Horon, the Lord threw down on them large hailstones from the sky, all the way to Azekah. They died – in fact, more died from the hailstones than the Israelites killed with the sword.
JOS 10:12 The day the Lord delivered the Amorites over to the Israelites, Joshua prayed to the Lord before Israel: “O sun, stand still over Gibeon! O moon, over the Valley of Aijalon!”
JOS 10:13 The sun stood still and the moon stood motionless while the nation took vengeance on its enemies. The event is recorded in the Scroll of the Upright One. The sun stood motionless in the middle of the sky and did not set for about a full day.
JOS 10:14 There has not been a day like it before or since. The Lord obeyed a man, for the Lord fought for Israel!
JOS 10:15 Then Joshua and all Israel returned to the camp at Gilgal.
JOS 10:16 The five Amorite kings ran away and hid in the cave at Makkedah.
JOS 10:17 Joshua was told, “The five kings have been found hiding in the cave at Makkedah.”
JOS 10:18 Joshua said, “Roll large stones over the mouth of the cave and post guards in front of it.
JOS 10:19 But don’t you delay! Chase your enemies and catch them! Don’t allow them to retreat to their cities, for the Lord your God is handing them over to you.”
JOS 10:20 Joshua and the Israelites almost totally wiped them out, but some survivors did escape to the fortified cities.
JOS 10:21 Then the whole army safely returned to Joshua at the camp in Makkedah. No one dared threaten the Israelites.
JOS 10:22 Joshua said, “Open the cave’s mouth and bring the five kings out of the cave to me.”
JOS 10:23 They did as ordered; they brought the five kings out of the cave to him – the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon.
JOS 10:24 When they brought the kings out to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the commanders of the troops who accompanied him, “Come here and put your feet on the necks of these kings.” So they came up and put their feet on their necks.
JOS 10:25 Then Joshua said to them, “Don’t be afraid and don’t panic! Be strong and brave, for the Lord will do the same thing to all your enemies you fight.
JOS 10:26 Then Joshua executed them and hung them on five trees. They were left hanging on the trees until evening.
JOS 10:27 At sunset Joshua ordered his men to take them down from the trees. They threw them into the cave where they had hidden and piled large stones over the mouth of the cave. (They remain to this very day.)
JOS 10:28 That day Joshua captured Makkedah and put the sword to it and its king. He annihilated everyone who lived in it; he left no survivors. He did to its king what he had done to the king of Jericho.
JOS 10:29 Joshua and all Israel marched from Makkedah to Libnah and fought against it.
JOS 10:30 The Lord handed it and its king over to Israel, and Israel put the sword to all who lived there; they left no survivors. They did to its king what they had done to the king of Jericho.
JOS 10:31 Joshua and all Israel marched from Libnah to Lachish. He deployed his troops and fought against it.
JOS 10:32 The Lord handed Lachish over to Israel and they captured it on the second day. They put the sword to all who lived there, just as they had done to Libnah.
JOS 10:33 Then King Horam of Gezer came up to help Lachish, but Joshua struck down him and his army until no survivors remained.
JOS 10:34 Joshua and all Israel marched from Lachish to Eglon. They deployed troops and fought against it.
JOS 10:35 That day they captured it and put the sword to all who lived there. That day they annihilated it just as they had done to Lachish.
JOS 10:36 Joshua and all Israel marched up from Eglon to Hebron and fought against it.
JOS 10:37 They captured it and put the sword to its king, all its surrounding cities, and all who lived in it; they left no survivors. As they had done at Eglon, they annihilated it and all who lived there.
JOS 10:38 Joshua and all Israel turned to Debir and fought against it.
JOS 10:39 They captured it, its king, and all its surrounding cities and put the sword to them. They annihilated everyone who lived there; they left no survivors. They did to Debir and its king what they had done to Libnah and its king and to Hebron.
JOS 10:40 Joshua defeated the whole land, including the hill country, the Negev, the lowlands, the slopes, and all their kings. He left no survivors. He annihilated everything that breathed, just as the Lord God of Israel had commanded.
JOS 10:41 Joshua conquered the area between Kadesh Barnea and Gaza and the whole region of Goshen, all the way to Gibeon.
JOS 10:42 Joshua captured in one campaign all these kings and their lands, for the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.
JOS 10:43 Then Joshua and all Israel returned to the camp at Gilgal.
JOS 11:1 When King Jabin of Hazor heard the news, he organized a coalition, including King Jobab of Madon, the king of Shimron, the king of Acshaph,
JOS 11:2 and the northern kings who ruled in the hill country, the Arabah south of Kinnereth, the lowlands, and the heights of Dor to the west.
JOS 11:3 Canaanites came from the east and west; Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, and Jebusites from the hill country; and Hivites from below Hermon in the area of Mizpah.
JOS 11:4 These kings came out with their armies; they were as numerous as the sand on the seashore and had a large number of horses and chariots.
JOS 11:5 All these kings gathered and joined forces at the Waters of Merom to fight Israel.
JOS 11:6 The Lord told Joshua, “Don’t be afraid of them, for about this time tomorrow I will cause all of them to lie dead before Israel. You must hamstring their horses and burn their chariots.”
JOS 11:7 Joshua and his whole army caught them by surprise at the Waters of Merom and attacked them.
JOS 11:8 The Lord handed them over to Israel and they struck them down and chased them all the way to Greater Sidon, Misrephoth Maim, and the Mizpah Valley to the east. They struck them down until no survivors remained.
JOS 11:9 Joshua did to them as the Lord had commanded him; he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots.
JOS 11:10 At that time Joshua turned, captured Hazor, and struck down its king with the sword, for Hazor was at that time the leader of all these kingdoms.
JOS 11:11 They annihilated everyone who lived there with the sword – no one who breathed remained – and burned Hazor.
JOS 11:12 Joshua captured all these royal cities and all their kings and annihilated them with the sword, as Moses the Lord’s servant had commanded.
JOS 11:13 But Israel did not burn any of the cities located on mounds, except for Hazor; it was the only one Joshua burned.
JOS 11:14 The Israelites plundered all the goods of these cities and the cattle, but they totally destroyed all the people and allowed no one who breathed to live.
JOS 11:15 Moses the Lord’s servant passed on the Lord’s commands to Joshua, and Joshua did as he was told. He did not ignore any of the commands the Lord had given Moses.
JOS 11:16 Joshua conquered the whole land, including the hill country, all the Negev, all the land of Goshen, the lowlands, the Arabah, the hill country of Israel and its lowlands,
JOS 11:17 from Mount Halak on up to Seir, as far as Baal Gad in the Lebanon Valley below Mount Hermon. He captured all their kings and executed them.
JOS 11:18 Joshua campaigned against these kings for quite some time.
JOS 11:19 No city made peace with the Israelites (except the Hivites living in Gibeon); they had to conquer all of them,
JOS 11:20 for the Lord determined to make them obstinate so they would attack Israel. He wanted Israel to annihilate them without mercy, as he had instructed Moses.
JOS 11:21 At that time Joshua attacked and eliminated the Anakites from the hill country – from Hebron, Debir, Anab, and all the hill country of Judah and Israel. Joshua annihilated them and their cities.
JOS 11:22 No Anakites were left in Israelite territory, though some remained in Gaza, Gath, and Ashdod.
JOS 11:23 Joshua conquered the whole land, just as the Lord had promised Moses, and he assigned Israel their tribal portions. Then the land was free of war.
JOS 12:1 Now these are the kings of the land whom the Israelites defeated and drove from their land on the east side of the Jordan, from the Arnon Valley to Mount Hermon, including all the eastern Arabah:
JOS 12:2 King Sihon of the Amorites who lived in Heshbon and ruled from Aroer (on the edge of the Arnon Valley) – including the city in the middle of the valley and half of Gilead – all the way to the Jabbok Valley bordering Ammonite territory.
JOS 12:3 His kingdom included the eastern Arabah from the Sea of Kinnereth to the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea), including the route to Beth Jeshimoth and the area southward below the slopes of Pisgah.
JOS 12:4 The territory of King Og of Bashan, one of the few remaining Rephaites, who lived in Ashtaroth and Edrei
JOS 12:5 and ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, all of Bashan to the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and half of Gilead as far as the border of King Sihon of Heshbon.
JOS 12:6 Moses the Lord’s servant and the Israelites defeated them and Moses the Lord’s servant assigned their land to Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh.
JOS 12:7 These are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the Israelites defeated on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal Gad in the Lebanon Valley to Mount Halak on up to Seir. Joshua assigned this territory to the Israelite tribes,
JOS 12:8 including the hill country, the lowlands, the Arabah, the slopes, the wilderness, and the Negev – the land of the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites:
JOS 12:9 the king of Jericho (one), the king of Ai – located near Bethel – (one),
JOS 12:10 the king of Jerusalem (one), the king of Hebron (one),
JOS 12:11 the king of Jarmuth (one), the king of Lachish (one),
JOS 12:12 the king of Eglon (one), the king of Gezer (one),
JOS 12:13 the king of Debir (one), the king of Geder (one),
JOS 12:14 the king of Hormah (one), the king of Arad (one),
JOS 12:15 the king of Libnah (one), the king of Adullam (one),
JOS 12:16 the king of Makkedah (one), the king of Bethel (one),
JOS 12:17 the king of Tappuah (one), the king of Hepher (one),
JOS 12:18 the king of Aphek (one), the king of Lasharon (one),
JOS 12:19 the king of Madon (one), the king of Hazor (one),
JOS 12:20 the king of Shimron Meron (one), the king of Acshaph (one),
JOS 12:21 the king of Taanach (one), the king of Megiddo (one),
JOS 12:22 the king of Kedesh (one), the king of Jokneam near Carmel (one),
JOS 12:23 the king of Dor – near Naphath Dor – (one), the king of Goyim – near Gilgal – (one),
JOS 12:24 the king of Tirzah (one), a total of thirty-one kings.
JOS 13:1 When Joshua was very old, the Lord told him, “You are very old, and a great deal of land remains to be conquered.
JOS 13:2 This is the land that remains: all the territory of the Philistines and all the Geshurites,
JOS 13:3 from the Shihor River east of Egypt northward to the territory of Ekron (it is regarded as Canaanite territory), including the area belonging to the five Philistine lords who ruled in Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron, as well as Avvite land
JOS 13:4 to the south; all the Canaanite territory, from Arah in the region of Sidon to Aphek, as far as Amorite territory;
JOS 13:5 the territory of Byblos and all Lebanon to the east, from Baal Gad below Mount Hermon to Lebo Hamath.
JOS 13:6 I will drive out before the Israelites all who live in the hill country from Lebanon to Misrephoth Maim, all the Sidonians; you be sure to parcel it out to Israel as I instructed you.”
JOS 13:7 Now, divide up this land among the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh.”
JOS 13:8 The other half of Manasseh, Reuben, and Gad received their allotted tribal lands beyond the Jordan, just as Moses, the Lord’s servant, had assigned them.
JOS 13:9 Their territory started from Aroer (on the edge of the Arnon Valley), included the city in the middle of the valley, the whole plain of Medeba as far as Dibon,
JOS 13:10 and all the cities of King Sihon of the Amorites who ruled in Heshbon, and ended at the Ammonite border.
JOS 13:11 Their territory also included Gilead, Geshurite and Maacathite territory, all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan to Salecah –
JOS 13:12 the whole kingdom of Og in Bashan, who ruled in Ashtaroth and Edrei. (He was one of the few remaining Rephaites.) Moses defeated them and took their lands.
JOS 13:13 But the Israelites did not conquer the Geshurites and Maacathites; Geshur and Maacah live among Israel to this very day.
JOS 13:14 However, Moses did not assign land as an inheritance to the Levites; their inheritance is the sacrificial offerings made to the Lord God of Israel, as he instructed them.
JOS 13:15 Moses assigned land to the tribe of Reuben by its clans.
JOS 13:16 Their territory started at Aroer (on the edge of the Arnon Valley) and included the city in the middle of the valley, the whole plain of Medeba,
JOS 13:17 Heshbon and all its surrounding cities on the plain, including Dibon, Bamoth Baal, Beth Baal Meon,
JOS 13:18 Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath,
JOS 13:19 Kiriathaim, Sibmah, Zereth Shahar on the hill in the valley,
JOS 13:20 Beth Peor, the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth Jeshimoth.
JOS 13:21 It encompassed all the cities of the plain and the whole realm of King Sihon of the Amorites who ruled in Heshbon. Moses defeated him and the Midianite leaders Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba (they were subjects of Sihon and lived in his territory).
JOS 13:22 The Israelites killed Balaam son of Beor, the omen reader, along with the others.
JOS 13:23 The border of the tribe of Reuben was the Jordan. The land allotted to the tribe of Reuben by its clans included these cities and their towns.
JOS 13:24 Moses assigned land to the tribe of Gad by its clans.
JOS 13:25 Their territory included Jazer, all the cities of Gilead, and half of Ammonite territory as far as Aroer near Rabbah.
JOS 13:26 Their territory ran from Heshbon to Ramath Mizpah and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the territory of Debir.
JOS 13:27 It included the valley of Beth Haram, Beth Nimrah, Succoth, and Zaphon, and the rest of the realm of King Sihon of Heshbon, the area east of the Jordan to the end of the Sea of Kinnereth.
JOS 13:28 The land allotted to the tribe of Gad by its clans included these cities and their towns.
JOS 13:29 Moses assigned land to the half-tribe of Manasseh by its clans.
JOS 13:30 Their territory started at Mahanaim and encompassed all Bashan, the whole realm of King Og of Bashan, including all sixty cities in Havvoth Jair in Bashan.
JOS 13:31 Half of Gilead, Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities in the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were assigned to the descendants of Makir son of Manasseh, to half the descendants of Makir by their clans.
JOS 13:32 These are the land assignments made by Moses on the plains of Moab east of the Jordan River opposite Jericho.
JOS 13:33 However, Moses did not assign land as an inheritance to the Levites; their inheritance is the Lord God of Israel, as he instructed them.
JOS 14:1 The following is a record of the territory assigned to the Israelites in the land of Canaan by Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the Israelite tribal leaders.
JOS 14:2 The land assignments to the nine-and-a-half tribes were made by drawing lots, as the Lord had instructed Moses.
JOS 14:3 Now Moses had assigned land to the two-and-a-half tribes east of the Jordan, but he assigned no land to the Levites.
JOS 14:4 The descendants of Joseph were considered as two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. The Levites were allotted no territory, though they were assigned cities in which to live, along with the grazing areas for their cattle and possessions.
JOS 14:5 The Israelites followed the Lord’s instructions to Moses and divided up the land.
JOS 14:6 The men of Judah approached Joshua in Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, “You know what the Lord said about you and me to Moses, the man of God, at Kadesh Barnea.
JOS 14:7 I was forty years old when Moses, the Lord’s servant, sent me from Kadesh Barnea to spy on the land and I brought back to him an honest report.
JOS 14:8 My countrymen who accompanied me frightened the people, but I remained loyal to the Lord my God.
JOS 14:9 That day Moses made this solemn promise: ‘Surely the land on which you walked will belong to you and your descendants permanently, for you remained loyal to the Lord your God.’
JOS 14:10 So now, look, the Lord has preserved my life, just as he promised, these past forty-five years since the Lord spoke these words to Moses, during which Israel traveled through the wilderness. Now look, I am today eighty-five years old.
JOS 14:11 Today I am still as strong as when Moses sent me out. I can fight and go about my daily activities with the same energy I had then.
JOS 14:12 Now, assign me this hill country which the Lord promised me at that time! No doubt you heard at that time that the Anakites live there in large, fortified cities. But, assuming the Lord is with me, I will conquer them, as the Lord promised.”
JOS 14:13 Joshua asked God to empower Caleb son of Jephunneh and assigned him Hebron.
JOS 14:14 So Hebron remains the assigned land of Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this very day because he remained loyal to the Lord God of Israel.
JOS 14:15 (Hebron used to be called Kiriath Arba. Arba was a famous Anakite. ) Then the land was free of war.
JOS 15:1 The land allotted to the tribe of Judah by its clans reached to the border of Edom, to the Wilderness of Zin in the Negev far to the south.
JOS 15:2 Their southern border started at the southern tip of the Salt Sea,
JOS 15:3 extended south of the Scorpion Ascent, crossed to Zin, went up from the south to Kadesh Barnea, crossed to Hezron, went up to Addar, and turned toward Karka.
JOS 15:4 It then crossed to Azmon, extended to the Stream of Egypt, and ended at the sea. This was their southern border.
JOS 15:5 The eastern border was the Salt Sea to the mouth of the Jordan River. The northern border started north of the Salt Sea at the mouth of the Jordan,
JOS 15:6 went up to Beth Hoglah, crossed north of Beth Arabah, and went up to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.
JOS 15:7 It then went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor, turning northward to Gilgal (which is opposite the Pass of Adummim south of the valley), crossed to the waters of En Shemesh and extended to En Rogel.
JOS 15:8 It then went up the Valley of Ben Hinnom to the slope of the Jebusites on the south (that is, Jerusalem), going up to the top of the hill opposite the Valley of Ben Hinnom to the west, which is at the end of the Valley of the Rephaites to the north.
JOS 15:9 It then went from the top of the hill to the spring of the waters of Nephtoah, extended to the cities of Mount Ephron, and went to Baalah (that is, Kiriath Jearim).
JOS 15:10 It then turned from Baalah westward to Mount Seir, crossed to the slope of Mount Jearim on the north (that is Kesalon), descended to Beth Shemesh, and crossed to Timnah.
JOS 15:11 It then extended to the slope of Ekron to the north, went toward Shikkeron, crossed to Mount Baalah, extended to Jabneel, and ended at the sea.
JOS 15:12 The western border was the Mediterranean Sea. These were the borders of the tribe of Judah and its clans.
JOS 15:13 Caleb son of Jephunneh was assigned Kiriath Arba (that is Hebron) within the tribe of Judah, according to the Lord’s instructions to Joshua. (Arba was the father of Anak.)
JOS 15:14 Caleb drove out from there three Anakites – Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, descendants of Anak.
JOS 15:15 From there he attacked the people of Debir. (Debir used to be called Kiriath Sepher.)
JOS 15:16 Caleb said, “To the man who attacks and captures Kiriath Sepher I will give my daughter Acsah as a wife.”
JOS 15:17 When Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s brother, captured it, Caleb gave Acsah his daughter to him as a wife.
JOS 15:18 One time Acsah came and charmed her father so that she could ask him for some land. When she got down from her donkey, Caleb said to her, “What would you like?”
JOS 15:19 She answered, “Please give me a special present. Since you have given me land in the Negev, now give me springs of water. So he gave her both upper and lower springs.
JOS 15:20 This is the land assigned to the tribe of Judah by its clans:
JOS 15:21 These cities were located at the southern extremity of Judah’s tribal land near the border of Edom: Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur,
JOS 15:22 Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah,
JOS 15:23 Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan,
JOS 15:24 Ziph, Telem, Bealoth,
JOS 15:25 Hazor Hadattah, Kerioth Hezron (that is, Hazor),
JOS 15:26 Amam, Shema, Moladah,
JOS 15:27 Hazar Gaddah, Heshbon, Beth Pelet,
JOS 15:28 Hazar Shual, Beer Sheba, Biziothiah,
JOS 15:29 Baalah, Iim, Ezem,
JOS 15:30 Eltolad, Kesil, Hormah,
JOS 15:31 Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah,
JOS 15:32 Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon – a total of twenty-nine cities and their towns.
JOS 15:33 These cities were in the lowlands: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah,
JOS 15:34 Zanoah, En Gannim, Tappuah, Enam,
JOS 15:35 Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah,
JOS 15:36 Shaaraim, Adithaim, and Gederah (or Gederothaim) – a total of fourteen cities and their towns.
JOS 15:37 Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal Gad,
JOS 15:38 Dilean, Mizpah, Joktheel,
JOS 15:39 Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon,
JOS 15:40 Cabbon, Lahmas, Kitlish,
JOS 15:41 Gederoth, Beth Dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah – a total of sixteen cities and their towns.
JOS 15:42 Libnah, Ether, Ashan,
JOS 15:43 Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib,
JOS 15:44 Keilah, Aczib, and Mareshah – a total of nine cities and their towns.
JOS 15:45 Ekron and its surrounding towns and settlements;
JOS 15:46 from Ekron westward, all those in the vicinity of Ashdod and their towns;
JOS 15:47 Ashdod with its surrounding towns and settlements, and Gaza with its surrounding towns and settlements, as far as the Stream of Egypt and the border at the Mediterranean Sea.
JOS 15:48 These cities were in the hill country: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh,
JOS 15:49 Dannah, Kiriath Sannah (that is, Debir),
JOS 15:50 Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim,
JOS 15:51 Goshen, Holon, and Giloh – a total of eleven cities and their towns.
JOS 15:52 Arab, Dumah, Eshan,
JOS 15:53 Janim, Beth Tappuah, Aphekah,
JOS 15:54 Humtah, Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior – a total of nine cities and their towns.
JOS 15:55 Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah,
JOS 15:56 Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah,
JOS 15:57 Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah – a total of ten cities and their towns.
JOS 15:58 Halhul, Beth Zur, Gedor,
JOS 15:59 Maarath, Beth Anoth, and Eltekon – a total of six cities and their towns.
JOS 15:60 Kiriath Baal (that is, Kiriath Jearim) and Rabbah – a total of two cities and their towns.
JOS 15:61 These cities were in the desert: Beth Arabah, Middin, Secacah,
JOS 15:62 Nibshan, the city of Salt, and En Gedi – a total of six cities and their towns.
JOS 15:63 The men of Judah were unable to conquer the Jebusites living in Jerusalem. The Jebusites live with the people of Judah in Jerusalem to this very day.
JOS 16:1 The land allotted to Joseph’s descendants extended from the Jordan at Jericho
JOS 16:2 The southern border extended from Bethel to Luz, and crossed to Arkite territory at Ataroth.
JOS 16:3 It then descended westward to Japhletite territory, as far as the territory of lower Beth Horon and Gezer, and ended at the sea.
JOS 16:4 Joseph’s descendants, Manasseh and Ephraim, were assigned their land.
JOS 16:5 The territory of the tribe of Ephraim by its clans included the following: The border of their assigned land to the east was Ataroth Addar as far as upper Beth Horon.
JOS 16:6 It then extended on to the sea, with Micmethath on the north. It turned eastward to Taanath Shiloh and crossed it on the east to Janoah.
JOS 16:7 It then descended from Janoah to Ataroth and Naarah, touched Jericho, and extended to the Jordan River.
JOS 16:8 From Tappuah it went westward to the Valley of Kanah and ended at the sea. This is the land assigned to the tribe of Ephraim by its clans.
JOS 16:9 Also included were the cities set apart for the tribe of Ephraim within Manasseh’s territory, along with their towns.
JOS 16:10 The Ephraimites did not conquer the Canaanites living in Gezer. The Canaanites live among the Ephraimites to this very day and do hard labor as their servants.
JOS 17:1 The tribe of Manasseh, Joseph’s firstborn son, was also allotted land. The descendants of Makir, Manasseh’s firstborn and the father of Gilead, received land, for they were warriors. They were assigned Gilead and Bashan.
JOS 17:2 The rest of Manasseh’s descendants were also assigned land by their clans, including the descendants of Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher, and Shemida. These are the male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph by their clans.
JOS 17:3 Now Zelophehad son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Makir, son of Manasseh, had no sons, only daughters. These are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
JOS 17:4 They went before Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the leaders and said, “The Lord told Moses to assign us land among our relatives.” So Joshua assigned them land among their uncles, as the Lord had commanded.
JOS 17:5 Manasseh was allotted ten shares of land, in addition to the land of Gilead and Bashan east of the Jordan,
JOS 17:6 for the daughters of Manasseh were assigned land among his sons. The land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the descendants of Manasseh.
JOS 17:7 The border of Manasseh went from Asher to Micmethath which is near Shechem. It then went south toward those who live in Tappuah.
JOS 17:8 (The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah, located on the border of Manasseh, belonged to the tribe of Ephraim.)
JOS 17:9 The border then descended southward to the Valley of Kanah. Ephraim was assigned cities there among the cities of Manasseh, but the border of Manasseh was north of the valley and ended at the sea.
JOS 17:10 Ephraim’s territory was to the south, and Manasseh’s to the north. The sea was Manasseh’s western border and their territory touched Asher on the north and Issachar on the east.
JOS 17:11 Within Issachar’s and Asher’s territory Manasseh was assigned Beth Shean, Ibleam, the residents of Dor, En Dor, the residents of Taanach, the residents of Megiddo, the three of Napheth, and the towns surrounding all these cities.
JOS 17:12 But the men of Manasseh were unable to conquer these cities; the Canaanites managed to remain in those areas.
JOS 17:13 Whenever the Israelites were strong militarily, they forced the Canaanites to do hard labor, but they never totally conquered them.
JOS 17:14 The descendants of Joseph said to Joshua, “Why have you assigned us only one tribal allotment? After all, we have many people, for until now the Lord has enabled us to increase in number.”
JOS 17:15 Joshua replied to them, “Since you have so many people, go up into the forest and clear out a place to live in the land of the Perizzites and Rephaites, for the hill country of Ephraim is too small for you.”
JOS 17:16 The descendants of Joseph said, “The whole hill country is inadequate for us, and the Canaanites living down in the valley in Beth Shean and its surrounding towns and in the Valley of Jezreel have chariots with iron-rimmed wheels.”
JOS 17:17 Joshua said to the family of Joseph – to both Ephraim and Manasseh: “You have many people and great military strength. You will not have just one tribal allotment.
JOS 17:18 The whole hill country will be yours; though it is a forest, you can clear it and it will be entirely yours. You can conquer the Canaanites, though they have chariots with iron-rimmed wheels and are strong.”
JOS 18:1 The entire Israelite community assembled at Shiloh and there they set up the tent of meeting. Though they had subdued the land,
JOS 18:2 seven Israelite tribes had not been assigned their allotted land.
JOS 18:3 So Joshua said to the Israelites: “How long do you intend to put off occupying the land the Lord God of your ancestors has given you?
JOS 18:4 Pick three men from each tribe. I will send them out to walk through the land and make a map of it for me.
JOS 18:5 Divide it into seven regions. Judah will stay in its territory in the south, and the family of Joseph in its territory in the north.
JOS 18:6 But as for you, map out the land into seven regions and bring it to me. I will draw lots for you here before the Lord our God.
JOS 18:7 But the Levites will not have an allotted portion among you, for their inheritance is to serve the Lord. Gad, Reuben, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have already received their allotted land east of the Jordan which Moses the Lord’s servant assigned them.”
JOS 18:8 When the men started out, Joshua told those going to map out the land, “Go, walk through the land, map it out, and return to me. Then I will draw lots for you before the Lord here in Shiloh.”
JOS 18:9 The men journeyed through the land and mapped it and its cities out into seven regions on a scroll. Then they came to Joshua at the camp in Shiloh.
JOS 18:10 Joshua drew lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord and divided the land among the Israelites according to their allotted portions.
JOS 18:11 The first lot belonged to the tribe of Benjamin by its clans. Their allotted territory was between Judah and Joseph.
JOS 18:12 Their northern border started at the Jordan, went up to the slope of Jericho on the north, ascended westward to the hill country, and extended to the desert of Beth Aven.
JOS 18:13 It then crossed from there to Luz, to the slope of Luz to the south (that is, Bethel), and descended to Ataroth Addar located on the hill that is south of lower Beth Horon.
JOS 18:14 It then turned on the west side southward from the hill near Beth Horon on the south and extended to Kiriath Baal (that is, Kiriath Jearim), a city belonging to the tribe of Judah. This is the western border.
JOS 18:15 The southern side started on the edge of Kiriath Jearim and extended westward to the spring of the waters of Nephtoah.
JOS 18:16 The border then descended to the edge of the hill country near the Valley of Ben Hinnom located in the Valley of the Rephaites to the north. It descended through the Valley of Hinnom to the slope of the Jebusites to the south and then down to En Rogel.
JOS 18:17 It went northward, extending to En Shemesh and Geliloth opposite the Pass of Adummim, and descended to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.
JOS 18:18 It crossed to the slope in front of the Arabah to the north and descended into the Arabah.
JOS 18:19 It then crossed to the slope of Beth Hoglah to the north and ended at the northern tip of the Salt Sea at the mouth of the Jordan River. This was the southern border.
JOS 18:20 The Jordan River borders it on the east. These were the borders of the land assigned to the tribe of Benjamin by its clans.
JOS 18:21 These cities belonged to the tribe of Benjamin by its clans: Jericho, Beth Hoglah, Emek Keziz,
JOS 18:22 Beth Arabah, Zemaraim, Bethel,
JOS 18:23 Avvim, Parah, Ophrah,
JOS 18:24 Kephar Ammoni, Ophni, and Geba – a total of twelve cities and their towns.
JOS 18:25 Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth,
JOS 18:26 Mizpah, Kephirah, Mozah,
JOS 18:27 Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah,
JOS 18:28 Zelah, Haeleph, the Jebusite city (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah, and Kiriath – a total of fourteen cities and their towns. This was the land assigned to the tribe of Benjamin by its clans.
JOS 19:1 The second lot belonged to the tribe of Simeon by its clans.
JOS 19:2 Their assigned land included Beer Sheba, Moladah,
JOS 19:3 Hazar Shual, Balah, Ezem,
JOS 19:4 Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah,
JOS 19:5 Ziklag, Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susah,
JOS 19:6 Beth Lebaoth, and Sharuhen – a total of thirteen cities and their towns,
JOS 19:7 Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan – a total of four cities and their towns,
JOS 19:8 as well as all the towns around these cities as far as Baalath Beer (Ramah of the Negev). This was the land assigned to the tribe of Simeon by its clans.
JOS 19:9 Simeon’s assigned land was taken from Judah’s allotted portion, for Judah’s territory was too large for them; so Simeon was assigned land within Judah.
JOS 19:10 The third lot belonged to the tribe of Zebulun by its clans. The border of their territory extended to Sarid.
JOS 19:11 Their border went up westward to Maralah and touched Dabbesheth and the valley near Jokneam.
JOS 19:12 From Sarid it turned eastward to the territory of Kisloth Tabor, extended to Daberath, and went up to Japhia.
JOS 19:13 From there it crossed eastward to Gath Hepher and Eth Kazin and extended to Rimmon, turning toward Neah.
JOS 19:14 It then turned on the north to Hannathon and ended at the Valley of Iphtah El.
JOS 19:15 Their territory included Kattah, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah, and Bethlehem; in all they had twelve cities and their towns.
JOS 19:16 This was the land assigned to the tribe of Zebulun by its clans, including these cities and their towns.
JOS 19:17 The fourth lot belonged to the tribe of Issachar by its clans.
JOS 19:18 Their assigned land included Jezreel, Kesulloth, Shunem,
JOS 19:19 Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath,
JOS 19:20 Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez,
JOS 19:21 Remeth, En Gannim, En Haddah and Beth Pazzez.
JOS 19:22 Their border touched Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth Shemesh, and ended at the Jordan. They had sixteen cities and their towns.
JOS 19:23 This was the land assigned to the tribe of Issachar by its clans, including the cities and their towns.
JOS 19:24 The fifth lot belonged to the tribe of Asher by its clans.
JOS 19:25 Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Acshaph,
JOS 19:26 Alammelech, Amad, and Mishal. Their border touched Carmel to the west and Shihor Libnath.
JOS 19:27 It turned eastward toward Beth Dagon, touched Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtah El to the north, as well as the Valley of Emek and Neiel, and extended to Cabul on the north
JOS 19:28 and on to Ebron, Rehob, Hammon, and Kanah, as far as Greater Sidon.
JOS 19:29 It then turned toward Ramah as far as the fortified city of Tyre, turned to Hosah, and ended at the sea near Hebel, Aczib,
JOS 19:30 Umah, Aphek, and Rehob. In all they had twenty-two cities and their towns.
JOS 19:31 This was the land assigned to the tribe of Asher by its clans, including these cities and their towns.
JOS 19:32 The sixth lot belonged to the tribe of Naphtali by its clans.
JOS 19:33 Their border started at Heleph and the oak of Zaanannim, went to Adami Nekeb, Jabneel and on to Lakkum, and ended at the Jordan River.
JOS 19:34 It turned westward to Aznoth Tabor, extended from there to Hukok, touched Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west, and the Jordan on the east.
JOS 19:35 The fortified cities included Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Kinnereth,
JOS 19:36 Adamah, Ramah, Hazor,
JOS 19:37 Kedesh, Edrei, En Hazor,
JOS 19:38 Yiron, Migdal El, Horem, Beth Anath, and Beth Shemesh. In all they had nineteen cities and their towns.
JOS 19:39 This was the land assigned to the tribe of Naphtali by its clans, including the cities and their towns.
JOS 19:40 The seventh lot belonged to the tribe of Dan by its clans.
JOS 19:41 Their assigned land included Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir Shemesh,
JOS 19:42 Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah,
JOS 19:43 Elon, Timnah, Ekron,
JOS 19:44 Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath,
JOS 19:45 Jehud, Bene Berak, Gath Rimmon,
JOS 19:46 the waters of Jarkon, and Rakkon, including the territory in front of Joppa.
JOS 19:47 (The Danites failed to conquer their territory, so they went up and fought with Leshem and captured it. They put the sword to it, took possession of it, and lived in it. They renamed it Dan after their ancestor. )
JOS 19:48 This was the land assigned to the tribe of Dan by its clans, including these cities and their towns.
JOS 19:49 When they finished dividing the land into its regions, the Israelites gave Joshua son of Nun some land.
JOS 19:50 As the Lord had instructed, they gave him the city he requested – Timnath Serah in the Ephraimite hill country. He built up the city and lived in it.
JOS 19:51 These are the land assignments which Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the Israelite tribal leaders made by drawing lots in Shiloh before the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting. So they finished dividing up the land.
JOS 20:1 The Lord instructed Joshua:
JOS 20:2 “Have the Israelites select the cities of refuge that I told you about through Moses.
JOS 20:3 Anyone who accidentally kills someone can escape there; these cities will be a place of asylum from the avenger of blood.
JOS 20:4 The one who committed manslaughter should escape to one of these cities, stand at the entrance of the city gate, and present his case to the leaders of that city. They should then bring him into the city, give him a place to stay, and let him live there.
JOS 20:5 When the avenger of blood comes after him, they must not hand over to him the one who committed manslaughter, for he accidentally killed his fellow man without premeditation.
JOS 20:6 He must remain in that city until his case is decided by the assembly and the high priest dies. Then the one who committed manslaughter may return home to the city from which he escaped.”
JOS 20:7 So they selected Kedesh in Galilee in the hill country of Naphtali, Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron) in the hill country of Judah.
JOS 20:8 Beyond the Jordan east of Jericho they selected Bezer in the desert on the plain belonging to the tribe of Reuben, Ramoth in Gilead belonging to the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan belonging to the tribe of Manasseh.
JOS 20:9 These were the cities of refuge appointed for all the Israelites and for resident foreigners living among them. Anyone who accidentally killed someone could escape there and not be executed by the avenger of blood, at least until his case was reviewed by the assembly.
JOS 21:1 The tribal leaders of the Levites went before Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun and the Israelite tribal leaders
JOS 21:2 in Shiloh in the land of Canaan and said, “The Lord told Moses to assign us cities in which to live along with the grazing areas for our cattle.”
JOS 21:3 So the Israelites assigned these cities and their grazing areas to the Levites from their own holdings, as the Lord had instructed.
JOS 21:4 The first lot belonged to the Kohathite clans. The Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest were allotted thirteen cities from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.
JOS 21:5 The rest of Kohath’s descendants were allotted ten cities from the clans of the tribe of Ephraim, and from the tribe of Dan and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
JOS 21:6 Gershon’s descendants were allotted thirteen cities from the clans of the tribe of Issachar, and from the tribes of Asher and Naphtali and the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan.
JOS 21:7 Merari’s descendants by their clans were allotted twelve cities from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.
JOS 21:8 So the Israelites assigned to the Levites by lot these cities and their grazing areas, as the Lord had instructed Moses.
JOS 21:9 They assigned from the tribes of Judah and Simeon the cities listed below.
JOS 21:10 They were assigned to the Kohathite clans of the Levites who were descendants of Aaron, for the first lot belonged to them.
JOS 21:11 They assigned them Kiriath Arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, along with its surrounding grazing areas.
JOS 21:12 (Now the city’s fields and surrounding towns they had assigned to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his property.)
JOS 21:13 So to the descendants of Aaron the priest they assigned Hebron (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter), Libnah,
JOS 21:14 Jattir, Eshtemoa,
JOS 21:15 Holon, Debir,
JOS 21:16 Ain, Juttah, and Beth Shemesh, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of nine cities taken from these two tribes.
JOS 21:17 From the tribe of Benjamin they assigned Gibeon, Geba,
JOS 21:18 Anathoth, and Almon, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities.
JOS 21:19 The priests descended from Aaron received thirteen cities and their grazing areas.
JOS 21:20 The rest of the Kohathite clans of the Levites were allotted cities from the tribe of Ephraim.
JOS 21:21 They assigned them Shechem (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter) in the hill country of Ephraim, Gezer,
JOS 21:22 Kibzaim, and Beth Horon, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities.
JOS 21:23 From the tribe of Dan they assigned Eltekeh, Gibbethon,
JOS 21:24 Aijalon, and Gath Rimmon, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities.
JOS 21:25 From the half-tribe of Manasseh they assigned Taanach and Gath Rimmon, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of two cities.
JOS 21:26 The rest of the Kohathite clans received ten cities and their grazing areas.
JOS 21:27 They assigned to the Gershonite clans of the Levites the following cities: from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter) and Beeshtarah, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of two cities;
JOS 21:28 from the tribe of Issachar: Kishon, Daberath,
JOS 21:29 Jarmuth, and En Gannim, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities;
JOS 21:30 from the tribe of Asher: Mishal, Abdon,
JOS 21:31 Helkath, and Rehob, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities;
JOS 21:32 from the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter), Hammoth Dor, and Kartan, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of three cities.
JOS 21:33 The Gershonite clans received thirteen cities and their grazing areas.
JOS 21:34 They assigned to the Merarite clans (the remaining Levites) the following cities: from the tribe of Zebulun: Jokneam, Kartah,
JOS 21:35 Dimnah, and Nahalal, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities;
JOS 21:36 from the tribe of Reuben: Bezer, Jahaz,
JOS 21:37 Kedemoth, and Mephaath, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities;
JOS 21:38 from the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter), Mahanaim,
JOS 21:39 Heshbon, and Jazer, along with the grazing areas of each – a total of four cities.
JOS 21:40 The Merarite clans (the remaining Levites) were allotted twelve cities.
JOS 21:41 The Levites received within the land owned by the Israelites forty-eight cities in all and their grazing areas.
JOS 21:42 Each of these cities had grazing areas around it; they were alike in this regard.
JOS 21:43 So the Lord gave Israel all the land he had solemnly promised to their ancestors, and they conquered it and lived in it.
JOS 21:44 The Lord made them secure, in fulfillment of all he had solemnly promised their ancestors. None of their enemies could resist them.
JOS 21:45 Not one of the Lord’s faithful promises to the family of Israel was left unfulfilled; every one was realized.
JOS 22:1 Then Joshua summoned the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh
JOS 22:2 and told them: “You have carried out all the instructions of Moses the Lord’s servant, and you have obeyed all I have told you.
JOS 22:3 You have not abandoned your fellow Israelites this entire time, right up to this very day. You have completed the task given you by the Lord your God.
JOS 22:4 Now the Lord your God has made your fellow Israelites secure, just as he promised them. So now you may turn around and go to your homes in your own land which Moses the Lord’s servant assigned to you east of the Jordan.
JOS 22:5 But carefully obey the commands and instructions Moses the Lord’s servant gave you. Love the Lord your God, follow all his instructions, obey his commands, be loyal to him, and serve him with all your heart and being!”
JOS 22:6 Joshua rewarded them and sent them on their way; they returned to their homes.
JOS 22:7 (Now to one half-tribe of Manasseh, Moses had assigned land in Bashan; and to the other half Joshua had assigned land on the west side of the Jordan with their fellow Israelites.) When Joshua sent them home, he rewarded them,
JOS 22:8 saying, “Take home great wealth, a lot of cattle, silver, gold, bronze, iron, and a lot of clothing. Divide up the goods captured from your enemies with your brothers.”
JOS 22:9 So the Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh left the Israelites in Shiloh in the land of Canaan and headed home to their own land in Gilead, which they acquired by the Lord’s command through Moses.
JOS 22:10 The Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh came to Geliloth near the Jordan in the land of Canaan and built there, near the Jordan, an impressive altar.
JOS 22:11 The Israelites received this report: “Look, the Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar at the entrance to the land of Canaan, at Geliloth near the Jordan on the Israelite side.”
JOS 22:12 When the Israelites heard this, the entire Israelite community assembled at Shiloh to launch an attack against them.
JOS 22:13 The Israelites sent Phinehas, son of Eleazar, the priest, to the land of Gilead to the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
JOS 22:14 He was accompanied by ten leaders, one from each of the Israelite tribes, each one a family leader among the Israelite clans.
JOS 22:15 They went to the land of Gilead to the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and said to them:
JOS 22:16 “The entire community of the Lord says, ‘Why have you disobeyed the God of Israel by turning back today from following the Lord? You built an altar for yourselves and have rebelled today against the Lord.
JOS 22:17 The sin we committed at Peor was bad enough. To this very day we have not purified ourselves; it even brought a plague on the community of the Lord.
JOS 22:18 Now today you dare to turn back from following the Lord! You are rebelling today against the Lord; tomorrow he may break out in anger against the entire community of Israel.
JOS 22:19 But if your own land is impure, cross over to the Lord’s own land, where the Lord himself lives, and settle down among us. But don’t rebel against the Lord or us by building for yourselves an altar aside from the altar of the Lord our God.
JOS 22:20 When Achan son of Zerah disobeyed the command about the city’s riches, the entire Israelite community was judged, though only one man had sinned. He most certainly died for his sin!’”
JOS 22:21 The Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered the leaders of the Israelite clans:
JOS 22:22 “El, God, the Lord! El, God, the Lord! He knows the truth! Israel must also know! If we have rebelled or disobeyed the Lord, don’t spare us today!
JOS 22:23 If we have built an altar for ourselves to turn back from following the Lord by making burnt sacrifices and grain offerings on it, or by offering tokens of peace on it, the Lord himself will punish us.
JOS 22:24 We swear we have done this because we were worried that in the future your descendants would say to our descendants, ‘What relationship do you have with the Lord God of Israel?
JOS 22:25 The Lord made the Jordan a boundary between us and you Reubenites and Gadites. You have no right to worship the Lord.’ In this way your descendants might cause our descendants to stop obeying the Lord.
JOS 22:26 So we decided to build this altar, not for burnt offerings and sacrifices,
JOS 22:27 but as a reminder to us and you, and to our descendants who follow us, that we will honor the Lord in his very presence with burnt offerings, sacrifices, and tokens of peace. Then in the future your descendants will not be able to say to our descendants, ‘You have no right to worship the Lord.’
JOS 22:28 We said, ‘If in the future they say such a thing to us or to our descendants, we will reply, “See the model of the Lord’s altar that our ancestors made, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, but as a reminder to us and you.”’
JOS 22:29 Far be it from us to rebel against the Lord by turning back today from following after the Lord by building an altar for burnt offerings, sacrifices, and tokens of peace aside from the altar of the Lord our God located in front of his dwelling place!”
JOS 22:30 When Phinehas the priest and the community leaders and clan leaders who accompanied him heard the defense of the Reubenites, Gadites, and the Manassehites, they were satisfied.
JOS 22:31 Phinehas, son of Eleazar, the priest, said to the Reubenites, Gadites, and the Manassehites, “Today we know that the Lord is among us, because you have not disobeyed the Lord in this. Now you have rescued the Israelites from the Lord’s judgment.”
JOS 22:32 Phinehas, son of Eleazar, the priest, and the leaders left the Reubenites and Gadites in the land of Gilead and reported back to the Israelites in the land of Canaan.
JOS 22:33 The Israelites were satisfied with their report and gave thanks to God. They said nothing more about launching an attack to destroy the land in which the Reubenites and Gadites lived.
JOS 22:34 The Reubenites and Gadites named the altar, “Surely it is a Reminder to us that the Lord is God.”
JOS 23:1 A long time passed after the Lord made Israel secure from all their enemies, and Joshua was very old.
JOS 23:2 So Joshua summoned all Israel, including the elders, rulers, judges, and leaders, and told them: “I am very old.
JOS 23:3 You saw everything the Lord your God did to all these nations on your behalf, for the Lord your God fights for you.
JOS 23:4 See, I have parceled out to your tribes these remaining nations, from the Jordan to the Mediterranean Sea in the west, including all the nations I defeated.
JOS 23:5 The Lord your God will drive them out from before you and remove them, so you can occupy their land as the Lord your God promised you.
JOS 23:6 Be very strong! Carefully obey all that is written in the law scroll of Moses so you won’t swerve from it to the right or the left,
JOS 23:7 or associate with these nations that remain near you. You must not invoke or make solemn declarations by the names of their gods! You must not worship or bow down to them!
JOS 23:8 But you must be loyal to the Lord your God, as you have been to this very day.
JOS 23:9 “The Lord drove out from before you great and mighty nations; no one has been able to resist you to this very day.
JOS 23:10 One of you makes a thousand run away, for the Lord your God fights for you as he promised you he would.
JOS 23:11 Watch yourselves carefully! Love the Lord your God!
JOS 23:12 But if you ever turn away and make alliances with these nations that remain near you, and intermarry with them and establish friendly relations with them,
JOS 23:13 know for certain that the Lord our God will no longer drive out these nations from before you. They will trap and ensnare you; they will be a whip that tears your sides and thorns that blind your eyes until you disappear from this good land the Lord your God gave you.
JOS 23:14 “Look, today I am about to die. You know with all your heart and being that not even one of all the faithful promises the Lord your God made to you is left unfulfilled; every one was realized – not one promise is unfulfilled!
JOS 23:15 But in the same way every faithful promise the Lord your God made to you has been realized, it is just as certain, if you disobey, that the Lord will bring on you every judgment until he destroys you from this good land which the Lord your God gave you.
JOS 23:16 If you violate the covenantal laws of the Lord your God which he commanded you to keep, and follow, worship, and bow down to other gods, the Lord will be very angry with you and you will disappear quickly from the good land which he gave to you.”
JOS 24:1 Joshua assembled all the Israelite tribes at Shechem. He summoned Israel’s elders, rulers, judges, and leaders, and they appeared before God.
JOS 24:2 Joshua told all the people, “Here is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘In the distant past your ancestors lived beyond the Euphrates River, including Terah the father of Abraham and Nahor. They worshiped other gods,
JOS 24:3 but I took your father Abraham from beyond the Euphrates and brought him into the entire land of Canaan. I made his descendants numerous; I gave him Isaac,
JOS 24:4 and to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau. To Esau I assigned Mount Seir, while Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt.
JOS 24:5 I sent Moses and Aaron, and I struck Egypt down when I intervened in their land. Then I brought you out.
JOS 24:6 When I brought your fathers out of Egypt, you arrived at the sea. The Egyptians chased your fathers with chariots and horsemen to the Red Sea.
JOS 24:7 Your fathers cried out for help to the Lord; he made the area between you and the Egyptians dark, and then drowned them in the sea. You witnessed with your very own eyes what I did in Egypt. You lived in the wilderness for a long time.
JOS 24:8 Then I brought you to the land of the Amorites who lived east of the Jordan. They fought with you, but I handed them over to you; you conquered their land and I destroyed them from before you.
JOS 24:9 Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, launched an attack against Israel. He summoned Balaam son of Beor to call down judgment on you.
JOS 24:10 I refused to respond to Balaam; he kept prophesying good things about you, and I rescued you from his power.
JOS 24:11 You crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho. The leaders of Jericho, as well as the Amorites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hittites, Girgashites, Hivites, and Jebusites, fought with you, but I handed them over to you.
JOS 24:12 I sent terror ahead of you to drive out before you the two Amorite kings. I gave you the victory; it was not by your swords or bows.
JOS 24:13 I gave you a land in which you had not worked hard; you took up residence in cities you did not build and you are eating the produce of vineyards and olive groves you did not plant.’
JOS 24:14 Now obey the Lord and worship him with integrity and loyalty. Put aside the gods your ancestors worshiped beyond the Euphrates and in Egypt and worship the Lord.
JOS 24:15 If you have no desire to worship the Lord, choose today whom you will worship, whether it be the gods whom your ancestors worshiped beyond the Euphrates, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living. But I and my family will worship the Lord!”
JOS 24:16 The people responded, “Far be it from us to abandon the Lord so we can worship other gods!
JOS 24:17 For the Lord our God took us and our fathers out of slavery in the land of Egypt and performed these awesome miracles before our very eyes. He continually protected us as we traveled and when we passed through nations.
JOS 24:18 The Lord drove out from before us all the nations, including the Amorites who lived in the land. So we too will worship the Lord, for he is our God!”
JOS 24:19 Joshua warned the people, “You will not keep worshiping the Lord, for he is a holy God. He is a jealous God who will not forgive your rebellion or your sins.
JOS 24:20 If you abandon the Lord and worship foreign gods, he will turn against you; he will bring disaster on you and destroy you, though he once treated you well.”
JOS 24:21 The people said to Joshua, “No! We really will worship the Lord!”
JOS 24:22 Joshua said to the people, “Do you agree to be witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen to worship the Lord?” They replied, “We are witnesses!”
JOS 24:23 Joshua said, “Now put aside the foreign gods that are among you and submit to the Lord God of Israel.”
JOS 24:24 The people said to Joshua, “We will worship the Lord our God and obey him.”
JOS 24:25 That day Joshua drew up an agreement for the people, and he established rules and regulations for them in Shechem.
JOS 24:26 Joshua wrote these words in the Law Scroll of God. He then took a large stone and set it up there under the oak tree near the Lord’s shrine.
JOS 24:27 Joshua said to all the people, “Look, this stone will be a witness against you, for it has heard everything the Lord said to us. It will be a witness against you if you deny your God.”
JOS 24:28 When Joshua dismissed the people, they went to their allotted portions of land.
JOS 24:29 After all this Joshua son of Nun, the Lord’s servant, died at the age of one hundred ten.
JOS 24:30 They buried him in his allotted territory in Timnath Serah in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.
JOS 24:31 Israel worshiped the Lord throughout Joshua’s lifetime and as long as the elderly men who outlived him remained alive. These men had experienced firsthand everything the Lord had done for Israel.
JOS 24:32 The bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought up from Egypt, were buried at Shechem in the part of the field that Jacob bought from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for one hundred pieces of money. So it became the inheritance of the tribe of Joseph.
JOS 24:33 Eleazar son of Aaron died, and they buried him in Gibeah in the hill country of Ephraim, where his son Phinehas had been assigned land.
JDG 1:1 After Joshua died, the Israelites asked the Lord, “Who should lead the invasion against the Canaanites and launch the attack?”
JDG 1:2 The Lord said, “The men of Judah should take the lead. Be sure of this! I am handing the land over to them.”
JDG 1:3 The men of Judah said to their relatives, the men of Simeon, “Invade our allotted land with us and help us attack the Canaanites. Then we will go with you into your allotted land.” So the men of Simeon went with them.
JDG 1:4 The men of Judah attacked, and the Lord handed the Canaanites and Perizzites over to them. They killed ten thousand men at Bezek.
JDG 1:5 They met Adoni-Bezek at Bezek and fought him. They defeated the Canaanites and Perizzites.
JDG 1:6 When Adoni-Bezek ran away, they chased him and captured him. Then they cut off his thumbs and big toes.
JDG 1:7 Adoni-Bezek said, “Seventy kings, with thumbs and big toes cut off, used to lick up food scraps under my table. God has repaid me for what I did to them.” They brought him to Jerusalem, where he died.
JDG 1:8 The men of Judah attacked Jerusalem and captured it. They put the sword to it and set the city on fire.
JDG 1:9 Later the men of Judah went down to attack the Canaanites living in the hill country, the Negev, and the lowlands.
JDG 1:10 The men of Judah attacked the Canaanites living in Hebron. (Hebron used to be called Kiriath Arba.) They killed Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai.
JDG 1:11 From there they attacked the people of Debir. (Debir used to be called Kiriath Sepher.)
JDG 1:12 Caleb said, “To the man who attacks and captures Kiriath Sepher I will give my daughter Acsah as a wife.”
JDG 1:13 When Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, captured it, Caleb gave him his daughter Acsah as a wife.
JDG 1:14 One time Acsah came and charmed her father so she could ask him for some land. When she got down from her donkey, Caleb said to her, “What would you like?”
JDG 1:15 She answered, “Please give me a special present. Since you have given me land in the Negev, now give me springs of water.” So Caleb gave her both the upper and lower springs.
JDG 1:16 Now the descendants of the Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law, went up with the people of Judah from the City of Date Palm Trees to Arad in the desert of Judah, located in the Negev. They went and lived with the people of Judah.
JDG 1:17 The men of Judah went with their brothers the men of Simeon and defeated the Canaanites living in Zephath. They wiped out Zephath. So people now call the city Hormah.
JDG 1:18 The men of Judah captured Gaza, Ashkelon, Ekron, and the territory surrounding each of these cities.
JDG 1:19 The Lord was with the men of Judah. They conquered the hill country, but they could not conquer the people living in the coastal plain, because they had chariots with iron-rimmed wheels.
JDG 1:20 Caleb received Hebron, just as Moses had promised. He drove out the three Anakites.
JDG 1:21 The men of Benjamin, however, did not conquer the Jebusites living in Jerusalem. The Jebusites live with the people of Benjamin in Jerusalem to this very day.
JDG 1:22 When the men of Joseph attacked Bethel, the Lord was with them.
JDG 1:23 When the men of Joseph spied out Bethel (it used to be called Luz),
JDG 1:24 the spies spotted a man leaving the city. They said to him, “If you show us a secret entrance into the city, we will reward you.”
JDG 1:25 He showed them a secret entrance into the city, and they put the city to the sword. But they let the man and his extended family leave safely.
JDG 1:26 He moved to Hittite country and built a city. He named it Luz, and it has kept that name to this very day.
JDG 1:27 The men of Manasseh did not conquer Beth Shan, Taanach, or their surrounding towns. Nor did they conquer the people living in Dor, Ibleam, Megiddo or their surrounding towns. The Canaanites managed to remain in those areas.
JDG 1:28 Whenever Israel was strong militarily, they forced the Canaanites to do hard labor, but they never totally conquered them.
JDG 1:29 The men of Ephraim did not conquer the Canaanites living in Gezer. The Canaanites lived among them in Gezer.
JDG 1:30 The men of Zebulun did not conquer the people living in Kitron and Nahalol. The Canaanites lived among them and were forced to do hard labor.
JDG 1:31 The men of Asher did not conquer the people living in Acco or Sidon, nor did they conquer Ahlab, Aczib, Helbah, Aphek, or Rehob.
JDG 1:32 The people of Asher live among the Canaanites residing in the land because they did not conquer them.
JDG 1:33 The men of Naphtali did not conquer the people living in Beth Shemesh or Beth Anath. They live among the Canaanites residing in the land. The Canaanites living in Beth Shemesh and Beth Anath were forced to do hard labor for them.
JDG 1:34 The Amorites forced the people of Dan to live in the hill country. They did not allow them to live in the coastal plain.
JDG 1:35 The Amorites managed to remain in Har Heres, Aijalon, and Shaalbim. Whenever the tribe of Joseph was strong militarily, the Amorites were forced to do hard labor.
JDG 1:36 The border of Amorite territory ran from the Scorpion Ascent to Sela and on up.
JDG 2:1 The Lord’s angelic messenger went up from Gilgal to Bokim. He said, “I brought you up from Egypt and led you into the land I had solemnly promised to give to your ancestors. I said, ‘I will never break my agreement with you,
JDG 2:2 but you must not make an agreement with the people who live in this land. You should tear down the altars where they worship.’ But you have disobeyed me. Why would you do such a thing?
JDG 2:3 At that time I also warned you, ‘If you disobey, I will not drive out the Canaanites before you. They will ensnare you and their gods will lure you away.’”
JDG 2:4 When the Lord’s messenger finished speaking these words to all the Israelites, the people wept loudly.
JDG 2:5 They named that place Bokim and offered sacrifices to the Lord there.
JDG 2:6 When Joshua dismissed the people, the Israelites went to their allotted portions of territory, intending to take possession of the land.
JDG 2:7 The people worshiped the Lord throughout Joshua’s lifetime and as long as the elderly men who outlived him remained alive. These men had witnessed all the great things the Lord had done for Israel.
JDG 2:8 Joshua son of Nun, the Lord’s servant, died at the age of one hundred ten.
JDG 2:9 The people buried him in his allotted land in Timnath Heres in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.
JDG 2:10 That entire generation passed away; a new generation grew up that had not personally experienced the Lord’s presence or seen what he had done for Israel.
JDG 2:11 The Israelites did evil before the Lord by worshiping the Baals.
JDG 2:12 They abandoned the Lord God of their ancestors who brought them out of the land of Egypt. They followed other gods – the gods of the nations who lived around them. They worshiped them and made the Lord angry.
JDG 2:13 They abandoned the Lord and worshiped Baal and the Ashtars.
JDG 2:14 The Lord was furious with Israel and handed them over to robbers who plundered them. He turned them over to their enemies who lived around them. They could not withstand their enemies’ attacks.
JDG 2:15 Whenever they went out to fight, the Lord did them harm, just as he had warned and solemnly vowed he would do. They suffered greatly.
JDG 2:16 The Lord raised up leaders who delivered them from these robbers.
JDG 2:17 But they did not obey their leaders. Instead they prostituted themselves to other gods and worshiped them. They quickly turned aside from the path their ancestors had walked. Their ancestors had obeyed the Lord’s commands, but they did not.
JDG 2:18 When the Lord raised up leaders for them, the Lord was with each leader and delivered the people from their enemies while the leader remained alive. The Lord felt sorry for them when they cried out in agony because of what their harsh oppressors did to them.
JDG 2:19 When a leader died, the next generation would again act more wickedly than the previous one. They would follow after other gods, worshiping them and bowing down to them. They did not give up their practices or their stubborn ways.
JDG 2:20 The Lord was furious with Israel. He said, “This nation has violated the terms of the agreement I made with their ancestors by disobeying me.
JDG 2:21 So I will no longer remove before them any of the nations that Joshua left unconquered when he died.
JDG 2:22 Joshua left those nations to test Israel. I wanted to see whether or not the people would carefully walk in the path marked out by the Lord, as their ancestors were careful to do.”
JDG 2:23 This is why the Lord permitted these nations to remain and did not conquer them immediately; he did not hand them over to Joshua.
JDG 3:1 These were the nations the Lord permitted to remain so he could use them to test Israel – he wanted to test all those who had not experienced battle against the Canaanites.
JDG 3:2 He left those nations simply because he wanted to teach the subsequent generations of Israelites, who had not experienced the earlier battles, how to conduct holy war.
JDG 3:3 These were the nations: the five lords of the Philistines, all the Canaanites, the Sidonians, and the Hivites living in Mount Lebanon, from Mount Baal Hermon to Lebo-Hamath.
JDG 3:4 They were left to test Israel, so the Lord would know if his people would obey the commands he gave their ancestors through Moses.
JDG 3:5 The Israelites lived among the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
JDG 3:6 They took the Canaanites’ daughters as wives and gave their daughters to the Canaanites; they worshiped their gods as well.
JDG 3:7 The Israelites did evil in the Lord’s sight. They forgot the Lord their God and worshiped the Baals and the Asherahs.
JDG 3:8 The Lord was furious with Israel and turned them over to King Cushan-Rishathaim of Aram-Naharaim. They were Cushan-Rishathaim’s subjects for eight years.
JDG 3:9 When the Israelites cried out for help to the Lord, he raised up a deliverer for the Israelites who rescued them. His name was Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother.
JDG 3:10 The Lord’s spirit empowered him and he led Israel. When he went to do battle, the Lord handed over to him King Cushan-Rishathaim of Aram and he overpowered him.
JDG 3:11 The land had rest for forty years; then Othniel son of Kenaz died.
JDG 3:12 The Israelites again did evil in the Lord’s sight. The Lord gave King Eglon of Moab control over Israel because they had done evil in the Lord’s sight.
JDG 3:13 Eglon formed alliances with the Ammonites and Amalekites. He came and defeated Israel, and they seized the City of Date Palm Trees.
JDG 3:14 The Israelites were subject to King Eglon of Moab for eighteen years.
JDG 3:15 When the Israelites cried out for help to the Lord, he raised up a deliverer for them. His name was Ehud son of Gera the Benjaminite, a left-handed man. The Israelites sent him to King Eglon of Moab with their tribute payment.
JDG 3:16 Ehud made himself a sword – it had two edges and was eighteen inches long. He strapped it under his coat on his right thigh.
JDG 3:17 He brought the tribute payment to King Eglon of Moab. (Now Eglon was a very fat man.)
JDG 3:18 After Ehud brought the tribute payment, he dismissed the people who had carried it.
JDG 3:19 But he went back once he reached the carved images at Gilgal. He said to Eglon, “I have a secret message for you, O king.” Eglon said, “Be quiet!” All his attendants left.
JDG 3:20 When Ehud approached him, he was sitting in his well-ventilated upper room all by himself. Ehud said, “I have a message from God for you.” When Eglon rose up from his seat,
JDG 3:21 Ehud reached with his left hand, pulled the sword from his right thigh, and drove it into Eglon’s belly.
JDG 3:22 The handle went in after the blade, and the fat closed around the blade, for Ehud did not pull the sword out of his belly.
JDG 3:23 As Ehud went out into the vestibule, he closed the doors of the upper room behind him and locked them.
JDG 3:24 When Ehud had left, Eglon’s servants came and saw the locked doors of the upper room. They said, “He must be relieving himself in the well-ventilated inner room.”
JDG 3:25 They waited so long they were embarrassed, but he still did not open the doors of the upper room. Finally they took the key and opened the doors. Right before their eyes was their master, sprawled out dead on the floor!
JDG 3:26 Now Ehud had escaped while they were delaying. When he passed the carved images, he escaped to Seirah.
JDG 3:27 When he reached Seirah, he blew a trumpet in the Ephraimite hill country. The Israelites went down with him from the hill country, with Ehud in the lead.
JDG 3:28 He said to them, “Follow me, for the Lord is about to defeat your enemies, the Moabites!” They followed him, captured the fords of the Jordan River opposite Moab, and did not let anyone cross.
JDG 3:29 That day they killed about ten thousand Moabites – all strong, capable warriors; not one escaped.
JDG 3:30 Israel humiliated Moab that day, and the land had rest for eighty years.
JDG 3:31 After Ehud came Shamgar son of Anath; he killed six hundred Philistines with an oxgoad and, like Ehud, delivered Israel.
JDG 4:1 The Israelites again did evil in the Lord’s sight after Ehud’s death.
JDG 4:2 The Lord turned them over to King Jabin of Canaan, who ruled in Hazor. The general of his army was Sisera, who lived in Harosheth Haggoyim.
JDG 4:3 The Israelites cried out for help to the Lord, because Sisera had nine hundred chariots with iron-rimmed wheels, and he cruelly oppressed the Israelites for twenty years.
JDG 4:4 Now Deborah, a prophetess, wife of Lappidoth, was leading Israel at that time.
JDG 4:5 She would sit under the Date Palm Tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in the Ephraimite hill country. The Israelites would come up to her to have their disputes settled.
JDG 4:6 She summoned Barak son of Abinoam from Kedesh in Naphtali. She said to him, “Is it not true that the Lord God of Israel is commanding you? Go, march to Mount Tabor! Take with you ten thousand men from Naphtali and Zebulun!
JDG 4:7 I will bring Sisera, the general of Jabin’s army, to you at the Kishon River, along with his chariots and huge army. I will hand him over to you.”
JDG 4:8 Barak said to her, “If you go with me, I will go. But if you do not go with me, I will not go.”
JDG 4:9 She said, “I will indeed go with you. But you will not gain fame on the expedition you are undertaking, for the Lord will turn Sisera over to a woman.” Deborah got up and went with Barak to Kedesh.
JDG 4:10 Barak summoned men from Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh. Ten thousand men followed him; Deborah went up with him as well.
JDG 4:11 Now Heber the Kenite had moved away from the Kenites, the descendants of Hobab, Moses’ father-in-law. He lived near the great tree in Zaanannim near Kedesh.
JDG 4:12 When Sisera heard that Barak son of Abinoam had gone up to Mount Tabor,
JDG 4:13 he ordered all his chariotry – nine hundred chariots with iron-rimmed wheels – and all the troops he had with him to go from Harosheth-Haggoyim to the River Kishon.
JDG 4:14 Deborah said to Barak, “Spring into action, for this is the day the Lord is handing Sisera over to you! Has the Lord not taken the lead?” Barak quickly went down from Mount Tabor with ten thousand men following him.
JDG 4:15 The Lord routed Sisera, all his chariotry, and all his army with the edge of the sword. Sisera jumped out of his chariot and ran away on foot.
JDG 4:16 Now Barak chased the chariots and the army all the way to Harosheth Haggoyim. Sisera’s whole army died by the edge of the sword; not even one survived!
JDG 4:17 Now Sisera ran away on foot to the tent of Jael, wife of Heber the Kenite, for King Jabin of Hazor and the family of Heber the Kenite had made a peace treaty.
JDG 4:18 Jael came out to welcome Sisera. She said to him, “Stop and rest, my lord. Stop and rest with me. Don’t be afraid.” So Sisera stopped to rest in her tent, and she put a blanket over him.
JDG 4:19 He said to her, “Give me a little water to drink, because I’m thirsty.” She opened a goatskin container of milk and gave him some milk to drink. Then she covered him up again.
JDG 4:20 He said to her, “Stand watch at the entrance to the tent. If anyone comes along and asks you, ‘Is there a man here?’ say ‘No.’”
JDG 4:21 Then Jael wife of Heber took a tent peg in one hand and a hammer in the other. She crept up on him, drove the tent peg through his temple into the ground while he was asleep from exhaustion, and he died.
JDG 4:22 Now Barak was chasing Sisera. Jael went out to welcome him. She said to him, “Come here and I will show you the man you are searching for.” He went with her into the tent, and there he saw Sisera sprawled out dead with the tent peg in his temple.
JDG 4:23 That day God humiliated King Jabin of Canaan before the Israelites.
JDG 4:24 Israel’s power continued to overwhelm King Jabin of Canaan until they did away with him.
JDG 5:1 On that day Deborah and Barak son of Abinoam sang this victory song:
JDG 5:2 “When the leaders took the lead in Israel, When the people answered the call to war – Praise the Lord!
JDG 5:3 Hear, O kings! Pay attention, O rulers! I will sing to the Lord! I will sing to the Lord God of Israel!
JDG 5:4 O Lord, when you departed from Seir, when you marched from Edom’s plains, the earth shook, the heavens poured down, the clouds poured down rain.
JDG 5:5 The mountains trembled before the Lord, the God of Sinai; before the Lord God of Israel.
JDG 5:6 In the days of Shamgar son of Anath, in the days of Jael caravans disappeared; travelers had to go on winding side roads.
JDG 5:7 Warriors were scarce, they were scarce in Israel, until you arose, Deborah, until you arose as a motherly protector in Israel.
JDG 5:8 God chose new leaders, then fighters appeared in the city gates; but, I swear, not a shield or spear could be found, among forty military units in Israel.
JDG 5:9 My heart went out to Israel’s leaders, to the people who answered the call to war. Praise the Lord!
JDG 5:10 You who ride on light-colored female donkeys, who sit on saddle blankets, you who walk on the road, pay attention!
JDG 5:11 Hear the sound of those who divide the sheep among the watering places; there they tell of the Lord’s victorious deeds, the victorious deeds of his warriors in Israel. Then the Lord’s people went down to the city gates –
JDG 5:12 Wake up, wake up, Deborah! Wake up, wake up, sing a song! Get up, Barak! Capture your prisoners of war, son of Abinoam!
JDG 5:13 Then the survivors came down to the mighty ones; the Lord’s people came down to me as warriors.
JDG 5:14 They came from Ephraim, who uprooted Amalek, they follow after you, Benjamin, with your soldiers. From Makir leaders came down, from Zebulun came the ones who march carrying an officer’s staff.
JDG 5:15 Issachar’s leaders were with Deborah, the men of Issachar supported Barak; into the valley they were sent under Barak’s command. Among the clans of Reuben there was intense heart searching.
JDG 5:16 Why do you remain among the sheepfolds, listening to the shepherds playing their pipes for their flocks? As for the clans of Reuben – there was intense searching of heart.
JDG 5:17 Gilead stayed put beyond the Jordan River. As for Dan – why did he seek temporary employment in the shipyards? Asher remained on the seacoast, he stayed by his harbors.
JDG 5:18 The men of Zebulun were not concerned about their lives; Naphtali charged on to the battlefields.
JDG 5:19 Kings came, they fought; the kings of Canaan fought, at Taanach by the waters of Megiddo, but they took no silver as plunder.
JDG 5:20 From the sky the stars fought, from their paths in the heavens they fought against Sisera.
JDG 5:21 The Kishon River carried them off; the river confronted them – the Kishon River. Step on the necks of the strong!
JDG 5:22 The horses’ hooves pounded the ground; the stallions galloped madly.
JDG 5:23 ‘Call judgment down on Meroz,’ says the Lord’s angelic messenger; ‘Be sure to call judgment down on those who live there, because they did not come to help in the Lord’s battle, to help in the Lord’s battle against the warriors.’
JDG 5:24 The most rewarded of women should be Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite! She should be the most rewarded of women who live in tents.
JDG 5:25 He asked for water, and she gave him milk; in a bowl fit for a king, she served him curds.
JDG 5:26 Her left hand reached for the tent peg, her right hand for the workmen’s hammer. She “hammered” Sisera, she shattered his skull, she smashed his head, she drove the tent peg through his temple.
JDG 5:27 Between her feet he collapsed, he fell limp and was lifeless; between her feet he collapsed and fell limp, in the spot where he collapsed, there he fell limp – violently murdered!
JDG 5:28 Through the window she looked; Sisera’s mother cried out through the lattice: ‘Why is his chariot so slow to return? Why are the hoofbeats of his chariot-horses delayed?’
JDG 5:29 The wisest of her ladies answer; indeed she even thinks to herself,
JDG 5:30 ‘No doubt they are gathering and dividing the plunder – a girl or two for each man to rape! Sisera is grabbing up colorful cloth, he is grabbing up colorful embroidered cloth, two pieces of colorful embroidered cloth, for the neck of the plunderer!’
JDG 5:31 May all your enemies perish like this, O Lord! But may those who love you shine like the rising sun at its brightest!” And the land had rest for forty years.
JDG 6:1 The Israelites did evil in the Lord’s sight, so the Lord turned them over to Midian for seven years.
JDG 6:2 The Midianites overwhelmed Israel. Because of Midian the Israelites made shelters for themselves in the hills, as well as caves and strongholds.
JDG 6:3 Whenever the Israelites planted their crops, the Midianites, Amalekites, and the people from the east would attack them.
JDG 6:4 They invaded the land and devoured its crops all the way to Gaza. They left nothing for the Israelites to eat, and they took away the sheep, oxen, and donkeys.
JDG 6:5 When they invaded with their cattle and tents, they were as thick as locusts. Neither they nor their camels could be counted. They came to devour the land.
JDG 6:6 Israel was so severely weakened by Midian that the Israelites cried out to the Lord for help.
JDG 6:7 When the Israelites cried out to the Lord for help because of Midian,
JDG 6:8 he sent a prophet to the Israelites. He said to them, “This is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘I brought you up from Egypt and took you out of that place of slavery.
JDG 6:9 I rescued you from Egypt’s power and from the power of all who oppressed you. I drove them out before you and gave their land to you.
JDG 6:10 I said to you, “I am the Lord your God! Do not worship the gods of the Amorites, in whose land you are now living!” But you have disobeyed me.’”
JDG 6:11 The Lord’s angelic messenger came and sat down under the oak tree in Ophrah owned by Joash the Abiezrite. He arrived while Joash’s son Gideon was threshing wheat in a winepress so he could hide it from the Midianites.
JDG 6:12 The Lord’s messenger appeared and said to him, “The Lord is with you, courageous warrior!”
JDG 6:13 Gideon said to him, “Pardon me, but if the Lord is with us, why has such disaster overtaken us? Where are all his miraculous deeds our ancestors told us about? They said, ‘Did the Lord not bring us up from Egypt?’ But now the Lord has abandoned us and handed us over to Midian.”
JDG 6:14 Then the Lord himself turned to him and said, “You have the strength. Deliver Israel from the power of the Midianites! Have I not sent you?”
JDG 6:15 Gideon said to him, “But Lord, how can I deliver Israel? Just look! My clan is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the youngest in my family.”
JDG 6:16 The Lord said to him, “Ah, but I will be with you! You will strike down the whole Midianite army.”
JDG 6:17 Gideon said to him, “If you really are pleased with me, then give me a sign as proof that it is really you speaking with me.
JDG 6:18 Do not leave this place until I come back with a gift and present it to you.” The Lord said, “I will stay here until you come back.”
JDG 6:19 Gideon went and prepared a young goat, along with unleavened bread made from an ephah of flour. He put the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot. He brought the food to him under the oak tree and presented it to him.
JDG 6:20 God’s messenger said to him, “Put the meat and unleavened bread on this rock, and pour out the broth.” Gideon did as instructed.
JDG 6:21 The Lord’s messenger touched the meat and the unleavened bread with the tip of his staff. Fire flared up from the rock and consumed the meat and unleavened bread. The Lord’s messenger then disappeared.
JDG 6:22 When Gideon realized that it was the Lord’s messenger, he said, “Oh no! Master, Lord! I have seen the Lord’s messenger face to face!”
JDG 6:23 The Lord said to him, “You are safe! Do not be afraid! You are not going to die!”
JDG 6:24 Gideon built an altar for the Lord there, and named it “The Lord is on friendly terms with me.” To this day it is still there in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
JDG 6:25 That night the Lord said to him, “Take the bull from your father’s herd, as well as a second bull, one that is seven years old. Pull down your father’s Baal altar and cut down the nearby Asherah pole.
JDG 6:26 Then build an altar for the Lord your God on the top of this stronghold according to the proper pattern. Take the second bull and offer it as a burnt sacrifice on the wood from the Asherah pole that you cut down.”
JDG 6:27 So Gideon took ten of his servants and did just as the Lord had told him. He was too afraid of his father’s family and the men of the city to do it in broad daylight, so he waited until nighttime.
JDG 6:28 When the men of the city got up the next morning, they saw the Baal altar pulled down, the nearby Asherah pole cut down, and the second bull sacrificed on the newly built altar.
JDG 6:29 They said to one another, “Who did this?” They investigated the matter thoroughly and concluded that Gideon son of Joash had done it.
JDG 6:30 The men of the city said to Joash, “Bring out your son, so we can execute him! He pulled down the Baal altar and cut down the nearby Asherah pole.”
JDG 6:31 But Joash said to all those who confronted him, “Must you fight Baal’s battles? Must you rescue him? Whoever takes up his cause will die by morning! If he really is a god, let him fight his own battles! After all, it was his altar that was pulled down.”
JDG 6:32 That very day Gideon’s father named him Jerub-Baal, because he had said, “Let Baal fight with him, for it was his altar that was pulled down.”
JDG 6:33 All the Midianites, Amalekites, and the people from the east assembled. They crossed the Jordan River and camped in the Jezreel Valley.
JDG 6:34 The Lord’s spirit took control of Gideon. He blew a trumpet, summoning the Abiezrites to follow him.
JDG 6:35 He sent messengers throughout Manasseh and summoned them to follow him as well. He also sent messengers throughout Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, and they came up to meet him.
JDG 6:36 Gideon said to God, “If you really intend to use me to deliver Israel, as you promised, then give me a sign as proof.
JDG 6:37 Look, I am putting a wool fleece on the threshing floor. If there is dew only on the fleece, and the ground around it is dry, then I will be sure that you will use me to deliver Israel, as you promised.”
JDG 6:38 The Lord did as he asked. When he got up the next morning, he squeezed the fleece, and enough dew dripped from it to fill a bowl.
JDG 6:39 Gideon said to God, “Please do not get angry at me, when I ask for just one more sign. Please allow me one more test with the fleece. This time make only the fleece dry, while the ground around it is covered with dew.”
JDG 6:40 That night God did as he asked. Only the fleece was dry and the ground around it was covered with dew.
JDG 7:1 Jerub-Baal (that is, Gideon) and his men got up the next morning and camped near the spring of Harod. The Midianites were camped north of them near the hill of Moreh in the valley.
JDG 7:2 The Lord said to Gideon, “You have too many men for me to hand Midian over to you. Israel might brag, ‘Our own strength has delivered us.’
JDG 7:3 Now, announce to the men, ‘Whoever is shaking with fear may turn around and leave Mount Gilead.’” Twenty-two thousand men went home; ten thousand remained.
JDG 7:4 The Lord spoke to Gideon again, “There are still too many men. Bring them down to the water and I will thin the ranks some more. When I say, ‘This one should go with you,’ pick him to go; when I say, ‘This one should not go with you,’ do not take him.”
JDG 7:5 So he brought the men down to the water. Then the Lord said to Gideon, “Separate those who lap the water as a dog laps from those who kneel to drink.”
JDG 7:6 Three hundred men lapped; the rest of the men kneeled to drink water.
JDG 7:7 The Lord said to Gideon, “With the three hundred men who lapped I will deliver the whole army and I will hand Midian over to you. The rest of the men should go home.”
JDG 7:8 The men who were chosen took supplies and their trumpets. Gideon sent all the men of Israel back to their homes; he kept only three hundred men. Now the Midianites were camped down below in the valley.
JDG 7:9 That night the Lord said to Gideon, “Get up! Attack the camp, for I am handing it over to you.
JDG 7:10 But if you are afraid to attack, go down to the camp with Purah your servant
JDG 7:11 and listen to what they are saying. Then you will be brave and attack the camp.” So he went down with Purah his servant to where the sentries were guarding the camp.
JDG 7:12 Now the Midianites, Amalekites, and the people from the east covered the valley like a swarm of locusts. Their camels could not be counted; they were as innumerable as the sand on the seashore.
JDG 7:13 When Gideon arrived, he heard a man telling another man about a dream he had. The man said, “Look! I had a dream. I saw a stale cake of barley bread rolling into the Midianite camp. It hit a tent so hard it knocked it over and turned it upside down. The tent just collapsed.”
JDG 7:14 The other man said, “Without a doubt this symbolizes the sword of Gideon son of Joash, the Israelite. God is handing Midian and all the army over to him.”
JDG 7:15 When Gideon heard the report of the dream and its interpretation, he praised God. Then he went back to the Israelite camp and said, “Get up, for the Lord is handing the Midianite army over to you!”
JDG 7:16 He divided the three hundred men into three units. He gave them all trumpets and empty jars with torches inside them.
JDG 7:17 He said to them, “Watch me and do as I do. Watch closely! I am going to the edge of the camp. Do as I do!
JDG 7:18 When I and all who are with me blow our trumpets, you also blow your trumpets all around the camp. Then say, ‘For the Lord and for Gideon!’”
JDG 7:19 Gideon took a hundred men to the edge of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch, just after they had changed the guards. They blew their trumpets and broke the jars they were carrying.
JDG 7:20 All three units blew their trumpets and broke their jars. They held the torches in their left hand and the trumpets in their right. Then they yelled, “A sword for the Lord and for Gideon!”
JDG 7:21 They stood in order all around the camp. The whole army ran away; they shouted as they scrambled away.
JDG 7:22 When the three hundred men blew their trumpets, the Lord caused the Midianites to attack one another with their swords throughout the camp. The army fled to Beth Shittah on the way to Zererah. They went to the border of Abel Meholah near Tabbath.
JDG 7:23 Israelites from Naphtali, Asher, and Manasseh answered the call and chased the Midianites.
JDG 7:24 Now Gideon sent messengers throughout the Ephraimite hill country who announced, “Go down and head off the Midianites. Take control of the fords of the streams all the way to Beth Barah and the Jordan River.” When all the Ephraimites had assembled, they took control of the fords all the way to Beth Barah and the Jordan River.
JDG 7:25 They captured the two Midianite generals, Oreb and Zeeb. They executed Oreb on the rock of Oreb and Zeeb in the winepress of Zeeb. They chased the Midianites and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon, who was now on the other side of the Jordan River.
JDG 8:1 The Ephraimites said to him, “Why have you done such a thing to us? You did not summon us when you went to fight the Midianites!” They argued vehemently with him.
JDG 8:2 He said to them, “Now what have I accomplished compared to you? Even Ephraim’s leftover grapes are better quality than Abiezer’s harvest!
JDG 8:3 It was to you that God handed over the Midianite generals, Oreb and Zeeb! What did I accomplish to rival that?” When he said this, they calmed down.
JDG 8:4 Now Gideon and his three hundred men had crossed over the Jordan River, and even though they were exhausted, they were still chasing the Midianites.
JDG 8:5 He said to the men of Succoth, “Give some loaves of bread to the men who are following me, because they are exhausted. I am chasing Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.”
JDG 8:6 The officials of Succoth said, “You have not yet overpowered Zebah and Zalmunna. So why should we give bread to your army?”
JDG 8:7 Gideon said, “Since you will not help, after the Lord hands Zebah and Zalmunna over to me, I will thresh your skin with desert thorns and briers.”
JDG 8:8 He went up from there to Penuel and made the same request. The men of Penuel responded the same way the men of Succoth had.
JDG 8:9 He also threatened the men of Penuel, warning, “When I return victoriously, I will tear down this tower.”
JDG 8:10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with their armies. There were about fifteen thousand survivors from the army of the eastern peoples; a hundred and twenty thousand sword-wielding soldiers had been killed.
JDG 8:11 Gideon went up the road of the nomads east of Nobah and Jogbehah and ambushed the surprised army.
JDG 8:12 When Zebah and Zalmunna ran away, Gideon chased them and captured the two Midianite kings, Zebah and Zalmunna. He had surprised their entire army.
JDG 8:13 Gideon son of Joash returned from the battle by the pass of Heres.
JDG 8:14 He captured a young man from Succoth and interrogated him. The young man wrote down for him the names of Succoth’s officials and city leaders – seventy-seven men in all.
JDG 8:15 He approached the men of Succoth and said, “Look what I have! Zebah and Zalmunna! You insulted me, saying, ‘You have not yet overpowered Zebah and Zalmunna. So why should we give bread to your exhausted men?’”
JDG 8:16 He seized the leaders of the city, along with some desert thorns and briers; he then “threshed” the men of Succoth with them.
JDG 8:17 He also tore down the tower of Penuel and executed the city’s men.
JDG 8:18 He said to Zebah and Zalmunna, “Describe for me the men you killed at Tabor.” They said, “They were like you. Each one looked like a king’s son.”
JDG 8:19 He said, “They were my brothers, the sons of my mother. I swear, as surely as the Lord is alive, if you had let them live, I would not kill you.”
JDG 8:20 He ordered Jether his firstborn son, “Come on! Kill them!” But Jether was too afraid to draw his sword, because he was still young.
JDG 8:21 Zebah and Zalmunna said to Gideon, “Come on, you strike us, for a man is judged by his strength.” So Gideon killed Zebah and Zalmunna, and he took the crescent-shaped ornaments which were on the necks of their camels.
JDG 8:22 The men of Israel said to Gideon, “Rule over us – you, your son, and your grandson. For you have delivered us from Midian’s power.”
JDG 8:23 Gideon said to them, “I will not rule over you, nor will my son rule over you. The Lord will rule over you.”
JDG 8:24 Gideon continued, “I would like to make one request. Each of you give me an earring from the plunder you have taken.” (The Midianites had gold earrings because they were Ishmaelites.)
JDG 8:25 They said, “We are happy to give you earrings.” So they spread out a garment, and each one threw an earring from his plunder onto it.
JDG 8:26 The total weight of the gold earrings he requested came to seventeen hundred gold shekels. This was in addition to the crescent-shaped ornaments, jewelry, purple clothing worn by the Midianite kings, and the necklaces on the camels.
JDG 8:27 Gideon used all this to make an ephod, which he put in his hometown of Ophrah. All the Israelites prostituted themselves to it by worshiping it there. It became a snare to Gideon and his family.
JDG 8:28 The Israelites humiliated Midian; the Midianites’ fighting spirit was broken. The land had rest for forty years during Gideon’s time.
JDG 8:29 Then Jerub-Baal son of Joash went home and settled down.
JDG 8:30 Gideon fathered seventy sons through his many wives.
JDG 8:31 His concubine, who lived in Shechem, also gave him a son, whom he named Abimelech.
JDG 8:32 Gideon son of Joash died at a very old age and was buried in the tomb of his father Joash located in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
JDG 8:33 After Gideon died, the Israelites again prostituted themselves to the Baals. They made Baal-Berith their god.
JDG 8:34 The Israelites did not remain true to the Lord their God, who had delivered them from all the enemies who lived around them.
JDG 8:35 They did not treat the family of Jerub-Baal (that is, Gideon) fairly in return for all the good he had done for Israel.
JDG 9:1 Now Abimelech son of Jerub-Baal went to Shechem to see his mother’s relatives. He said to them and to his mother’s entire extended family,
JDG 9:2 “Tell all the leaders of Shechem this: ‘Why would you want to have seventy men, all Jerub-Baal’s sons, ruling over you, when you can have just one ruler? Recall that I am your own flesh and blood.’”
JDG 9:3 His mother’s relatives spoke on his behalf to all the leaders of Shechem and reported his proposal. The leaders were drawn to Abimelech; they said, “He is our close relative.”
JDG 9:4 They paid him seventy silver shekels out of the temple of Baal-Berith. Abimelech then used the silver to hire some lawless, dangerous men as his followers.
JDG 9:5 He went to his father’s home in Ophrah and murdered his half-brothers, the seventy legitimate sons of Jerub-Baal, on one stone. Only Jotham, Jerub-Baal’s youngest son, escaped, because he hid.
JDG 9:6 All the leaders of Shechem and Beth Millo assembled and then went and made Abimelech king by the oak near the pillar in Shechem.
JDG 9:7 When Jotham heard the news, he went and stood on the top of Mount Gerizim. He spoke loudly to the people below, “Listen to me, leaders of Shechem, so that God may listen to you!
JDG 9:8 “The trees were determined to go out and choose a king for themselves. They said to the olive tree, ‘Be our king!’
JDG 9:9 But the olive tree said to them, ‘I am not going to stop producing my oil, which is used to honor gods and men, just to sway above the other trees!’
JDG 9:10 “So the trees said to the fig tree, ‘You come and be our king!’
JDG 9:11 But the fig tree said to them, ‘I am not going to stop producing my sweet figs, my excellent fruit, just to sway above the other trees!’
JDG 9:12 “So the trees said to the grapevine, ‘You come and be our king!’
JDG 9:13 But the grapevine said to them, ‘I am not going to stop producing my wine, which makes gods and men so happy, just to sway above the other trees!’
JDG 9:14 “So all the trees said to the thornbush, ‘You come and be our king!’
JDG 9:15 The thornbush said to the trees, ‘If you really want to choose me as your king, then come along, find safety under my branches! Otherwise may fire blaze from the thornbush and consume the cedars of Lebanon!’
JDG 9:16 “Now, if you have shown loyalty and integrity when you made Abimelech king, if you have done right to Jerub-Baal and his family, if you have properly repaid him –
JDG 9:17 my father fought for you; he risked his life and delivered you from Midian’s power.
JDG 9:18 But you have attacked my father’s family today. You murdered his seventy legitimate sons on one stone and made Abimelech, the son of his female slave, king over the leaders of Shechem, just because he is your close relative.
JDG 9:19 So if you have shown loyalty and integrity to Jerub-Baal and his family today, then may Abimelech bring you happiness and may you bring him happiness!
JDG 9:20 But if not, may fire blaze from Abimelech and consume the leaders of Shechem and Beth Millo! May fire also blaze from the leaders of Shechem and Beth Millo and consume Abimelech!”
JDG 9:21 Then Jotham ran away to Beer and lived there to escape from Abimelech his half-brother.
JDG 9:22 Abimelech commanded Israel for three years.
JDG 9:23 God sent a spirit to stir up hostility between Abimelech and the leaders of Shechem. He made the leaders of Shechem disloyal to Abimelech.
JDG 9:24 He did this so the violent deaths of Jerub-Baal’s seventy sons might be avenged and Abimelech, their half-brother who murdered them, might have to pay for their spilled blood, along with the leaders of Shechem who helped him murder them.
JDG 9:25 The leaders of Shechem rebelled against Abimelech by putting bandits in the hills, who robbed everyone who traveled by on the road. But Abimelech found out about it.
JDG 9:26 Gaal son of Ebed came through Shechem with his brothers. The leaders of Shechem transferred their loyalty to him.
JDG 9:27 They went out to the field, harvested their grapes, squeezed out the juice, and celebrated. They came to the temple of their god and ate, drank, and cursed Abimelech.
JDG 9:28 Gaal son of Ebed said, “Who is Abimelech and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? Is he not the son of Jerub-Baal, and is not Zebul the deputy he appointed? Serve the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem! But why should we serve Abimelech?
JDG 9:29 If only these men were under my command, I would get rid of Abimelech!” He challenged Abimelech, “Muster your army and come out for battle!”
JDG 9:30 When Zebul, the city commissioner, heard the words of Gaal son of Ebed, he was furious.
JDG 9:31 He sent messengers to Abimelech, who was in Arumah, reporting, “Beware! Gaal son of Ebed and his brothers are coming to Shechem and inciting the city to rebel against you.
JDG 9:32 Now, come up at night with your men and set an ambush in the field outside the city.
JDG 9:33 In the morning at sunrise quickly attack the city. When he and his men come out to fight you, do what you can to him.”
JDG 9:34 So Abimelech and all his men came up at night and set an ambush outside Shechem – they divided into four units.
JDG 9:35 When Gaal son of Ebed came out and stood at the entrance to the city’s gate, Abimelech and his men got up from their hiding places.
JDG 9:36 Gaal saw the men and said to Zebul, “Look, men are coming down from the tops of the hills.” But Zebul said to him, “You are seeing the shadows on the hills – it just looks like men.”
JDG 9:37 Gaal again said, “Look, men are coming down from the very center of the land. A unit is coming by way of the Oak Tree of the Diviners.”
JDG 9:38 Zebul said to him, “Where now are your bragging words, ‘Who is Abimelech that we should serve him?’ Are these not the men you insulted? Go out now and fight them!”
JDG 9:39 So Gaal led the leaders of Shechem out and fought Abimelech.
JDG 9:40 Abimelech chased him, and Gaal ran from him. Many Shechemites fell wounded at the entrance of the gate.
JDG 9:41 Abimelech went back to Arumah; Zebul drove Gaal and his brothers out of Shechem.
JDG 9:42 The next day the Shechemites came out to the field. When Abimelech heard about it,
JDG 9:43 he took his men and divided them into three units and set an ambush in the field. When he saw the people coming out of the city, he attacked and struck them down.
JDG 9:44 Abimelech and his units attacked and blocked the entrance to the city’s gate. Two units then attacked all the people in the field and struck them down.
JDG 9:45 Abimelech fought against the city all that day. He captured the city and killed all the people in it. Then he leveled the city and spread salt over it.
JDG 9:46 When all the leaders of the Tower of Shechem heard the news, they went to the stronghold of the temple of El-Berith.
JDG 9:47 Abimelech heard that all the leaders of the Tower of Shechem were in one place.
JDG 9:48 He and all his men went up on Mount Zalmon. He took an ax in his hand and cut off a tree branch. He put it on his shoulder and said to his men, “Quickly, do what you have just seen me do!”
JDG 9:49 So each of his men also cut off a branch and followed Abimelech. They put the branches against the stronghold and set fire to it. All the people of the Tower of Shechem died – about a thousand men and women.
JDG 9:50 Abimelech moved on to Thebez; he besieged and captured it.
JDG 9:51 There was a fortified tower in the center of the city, so all the men and women, as well as the city’s leaders, ran into it and locked the entrance. Then they went up to the roof of the tower.
JDG 9:52 Abimelech came and attacked the tower. When he approached the entrance of the tower to set it on fire,
JDG 9:53 a woman threw an upper millstone down on his head and shattered his skull.
JDG 9:54 He quickly called to the young man who carried his weapons, “Draw your sword and kill me, so they will not say, ‘A woman killed him.’” So the young man stabbed him and he died.
JDG 9:55 When the Israelites saw that Abimelech was dead, they went home.
JDG 9:56 God repaid Abimelech for the evil he did to his father by murdering his seventy half-brothers.
JDG 9:57 God also repaid the men of Shechem for their evil deeds. The curse spoken by Jotham son of Jerub-Baal fell on them.
JDG 10:1 After Abimelech’s death, Tola son of Puah, grandson of Dodo, from the tribe of Issachar, rose up to deliver Israel. He lived in Shamir in the Ephraimite hill country.
JDG 10:2 He led Israel for twenty-three years, then died and was buried in Shamir.
JDG 10:3 Jair the Gileadite rose up after him; he led Israel for twenty-two years.
JDG 10:4 He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys and possessed thirty cities. To this day these towns are called Havvoth Jair – they are in the land of Gilead.
JDG 10:5 Jair died and was buried in Kamon.
JDG 10:6 The Israelites again did evil in the Lord’s sight. They worshiped the Baals and the Ashtars, as well as the gods of Syria, Sidon, Moab, the Ammonites, and the Philistines. They abandoned the Lord and did not worship him.
JDG 10:7 The Lord was furious with Israel and turned them over to the Philistines and Ammonites.
JDG 10:8 They ruthlessly oppressed the Israelites that eighteenth year – that is, all the Israelites living east of the Jordan in Amorite country in Gilead.
JDG 10:9 The Ammonites crossed the Jordan to fight with Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim. Israel suffered greatly.
JDG 10:10 The Israelites cried out for help to the Lord: “We have sinned against you. We abandoned our God and worshiped the Baals.”
JDG 10:11 The Lord said to the Israelites, “Did I not deliver you from Egypt, the Amorites, the Ammonites, the Philistines,
JDG 10:12 the Sidonians, Amalek, and Midian when they oppressed you? You cried out for help to me, and I delivered you from their power.
JDG 10:13 But since you abandoned me and worshiped other gods, I will not deliver you again.
JDG 10:14 Go and cry for help to the gods you have chosen! Let them deliver you from trouble!”
JDG 10:15 But the Israelites said to the Lord, “We have sinned. You do to us as you see fit, but deliver us today!”
JDG 10:16 They threw away the foreign gods they owned and worshiped the Lord. Finally the Lord grew tired of seeing Israel suffer so much.
JDG 10:17 The Ammonites assembled and camped in Gilead; the Israelites gathered together and camped in Mizpah.
JDG 10:18 The leaders of Gilead said to one another, “Who is willing to lead the charge against the Ammonites? He will become the leader of all who live in Gilead!”
JDG 11:1 Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a brave warrior. His mother was a prostitute, but Gilead was his father.
JDG 11:2 Gilead’s wife also gave him sons. When his wife’s sons grew up, they made Jephthah leave and said to him, “You are not going to inherit any of our father’s wealth, because you are another woman’s son.”
JDG 11:3 So Jephthah left his half-brothers and lived in the land of Tob. Lawless men joined Jephthah’s gang and traveled with him.
JDG 11:4 It was some time after this when the Ammonites fought with Israel.
JDG 11:5 When the Ammonites attacked, the leaders of Gilead asked Jephthah to come back from the land of Tob.
JDG 11:6 They said, “Come, be our commander, so we can fight with the Ammonites.”
JDG 11:7 Jephthah said to the leaders of Gilead, “But you hated me and made me leave my father’s house. Why do you come to me now, when you are in trouble?”
JDG 11:8 The leaders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “That may be true, but now we pledge to you our loyalty. Come with us and fight with the Ammonites. Then you will become the leader of all who live in Gilead.”
JDG 11:9 Jephthah said to the leaders of Gilead, “All right! If you take me back to fight with the Ammonites and the Lord gives them to me, I will be your leader.”
JDG 11:10 The leaders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “The Lord will judge any grievance you have against us, if we do not do as you say.”
JDG 11:11 So Jephthah went with the leaders of Gilead. The people made him their leader and commander. Jephthah repeated the terms of the agreement before the Lord in Mizpah.
JDG 11:12 Jephthah sent messengers to the Ammonite king, saying, “Why have you come against me to attack my land?”
JDG 11:13 The Ammonite king said to Jephthah’s messengers, “Because Israel stole my land when they came up from Egypt – from the Arnon River in the south to the Jabbok River in the north, and as far west as the Jordan. Now return it peaceably!”
JDG 11:14 Jephthah sent messengers back to the Ammonite king
JDG 11:15 and said to him, “This is what Jephthah says, ‘Israel did not steal the land of Moab and the land of the Ammonites.
JDG 11:16 When they left Egypt, Israel traveled through the desert as far as the Red Sea and then came to Kadesh.
JDG 11:17 Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, “Please allow us to pass through your land.” But the king of Edom rejected the request. Israel sent the same request to the king of Moab, but he was unwilling to cooperate. So Israel stayed at Kadesh.
JDG 11:18 Then Israel went through the desert and bypassed the land of Edom and the land of Moab. They traveled east of the land of Moab and camped on the other side of the Arnon River; they did not go through Moabite territory (the Arnon was Moab’s border).
JDG 11:19 Israel sent messengers to King Sihon, the Amorite king who ruled in Heshbon, and said to him, “Please allow us to pass through your land to our land.”
JDG 11:20 But Sihon did not trust Israel to pass through his territory. He assembled his whole army, camped in Jahaz, and fought with Israel.
JDG 11:21 The Lord God of Israel handed Sihon and his whole army over to Israel and they defeated them. Israel took all the land of the Amorites who lived in that land.
JDG 11:22 They took all the Amorite territory from the Arnon River on the south to the Jabbok River on the north, from the desert in the east to the Jordan in the west.
JDG 11:23 Since the Lord God of Israel has driven out the Amorites before his people Israel, do you think you can just take it from them?
JDG 11:24 You have the right to take what Chemosh your god gives you, but we will take the land of all whom the Lord our God has driven out before us.
JDG 11:25 Are you really better than Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he dare to quarrel with Israel? Did he dare to fight with them?
JDG 11:26 Israel has been living in Heshbon and its nearby towns, in Aroer and its nearby towns, and in all the cities along the Arnon for three hundred years! Why did you not reclaim them during that time?
JDG 11:27 I have not done you wrong, but you are doing wrong by attacking me. May the Lord, the Judge, judge this day between the Israelites and the Ammonites!’”
JDG 11:28 But the Ammonite king disregarded the message sent by Jephthah.
JDG 11:29 The Lord’s spirit empowered Jephthah. He passed through Gilead and Manasseh and went to Mizpah in Gilead. From there he approached the Ammonites.
JDG 11:30 Jephthah made a vow to the Lord, saying, “If you really do hand the Ammonites over to me,
JDG 11:31 then whoever is the first to come through the doors of my house to meet me when I return safely from fighting the Ammonites – he will belong to the Lord and I will offer him up as a burnt sacrifice.”
JDG 11:32 Jephthah approached the Ammonites to fight with them, and the Lord handed them over to him.
JDG 11:33 He defeated them from Aroer all the way to Minnith – twenty cities in all, even as far as Abel Keramim! He wiped them out! The Israelites humiliated the Ammonites.
JDG 11:34 When Jephthah came home to Mizpah, there was his daughter hurrying out to meet him, dancing to the rhythm of tambourines. She was his only child; except for her he had no son or daughter.
JDG 11:35 When he saw her, he ripped his clothes and said, “Oh no! My daughter! You have completely ruined me! You have brought me disaster! I made an oath to the Lord, and I cannot break it.”
JDG 11:36 She said to him, “My father, since you made an oath to the Lord, do to me as you promised. After all, the Lord vindicated you before your enemies, the Ammonites.”
JDG 11:37 She then said to her father, “Please grant me this one wish. For two months allow me to walk through the hills with my friends and mourn my virginity.”
JDG 11:38 He said, “You may go.” He permitted her to leave for two months. She went with her friends and mourned her virginity as she walked through the hills.
JDG 11:39 After two months she returned to her father, and he did to her as he had vowed. She died a virgin. Her tragic death gave rise to a custom in Israel.
JDG 11:40 Every year Israelite women commemorate the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite for four days.
JDG 12:1 The Ephraimites assembled and crossed over to Zaphon. They said to Jephthah, “Why did you go and fight with the Ammonites without asking us to go with you? We will burn your house down right over you!”
JDG 12:2 Jephthah said to them, “My people and I were entangled in controversy with the Ammonites. I asked for your help, but you did not deliver me from their power.
JDG 12:3 When I saw that you were not going to help, I risked my life and advanced against the Ammonites, and the Lord handed them over to me. Why have you come up to fight with me today?”
JDG 12:4 Jephthah assembled all the men of Gilead and they fought with Ephraim. The men of Gilead defeated Ephraim, because the Ephraimites insulted them, saying, “You Gileadites are refugees in Ephraim, living within Ephraim’s and Manasseh’s territory.”
JDG 12:5 The Gileadites captured the fords of the Jordan River opposite Ephraim. Whenever an Ephraimite fugitive said, “Let me cross over,” the men of Gilead asked him, “Are you an Ephraimite?” If he said, “No,”
JDG 12:6 then they said to him, “Say ‘Shibboleth!’” If he said, “Sibboleth” (and could not pronounce the word correctly), they grabbed him and executed him right there at the fords of the Jordan. On that day forty-two thousand Ephraimites fell dead.
JDG 12:7 Jephthah led Israel for six years; then he died and was buried in his city in Gilead.
JDG 12:8 After him Ibzan of Bethlehem led Israel.
JDG 12:9 He had thirty sons. He arranged for thirty of his daughters to be married outside his extended family, and he arranged for thirty young women to be brought from outside as wives for his sons. Ibzan led Israel for seven years;
JDG 12:10 then he died and was buried in Bethlehem.
JDG 12:11 After him Elon the Zebulunite led Israel for ten years.
JDG 12:12 Then Elon the Zebulunite died and was buried in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.
JDG 12:13 After him Abdon son of Hillel the Pirathonite led Israel.
JDG 12:14 He had forty sons and thirty grandsons who rode on seventy donkeys. He led Israel for eight years.
JDG 12:15 Then Abdon son of Hillel the Pirathonite died and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill country of the Amalekites.
JDG 13:1 The Israelites again did evil in the Lord’s sight, so the Lord handed them over to the Philistines for forty years.
JDG 13:2 There was a man named Manoah from Zorah, from the Danite tribe. His wife was infertile and childless.
JDG 13:3 The Lord’s angelic messenger appeared to the woman and said to her, “You are infertile and childless, but you will conceive and have a son.
JDG 13:4 Now be careful! Do not drink wine or beer, and do not eat any food that will make you ritually unclean.
JDG 13:5 Look, you will conceive and have a son. You must never cut his hair, for the child will be dedicated to God from birth. He will begin to deliver Israel from the power of the Philistines.”
JDG 13:6 The woman went and said to her husband, “A man sent from God came to me! He looked like God’s angelic messenger – he was very awesome. I did not ask him where he came from, and he did not tell me his name.
JDG 13:7 He said to me, ‘Look, you will conceive and have a son. So now, do not drink wine or beer and do not eat any food that will make you ritually unclean. For the child will be dedicated to God from birth till the day he dies.’”
JDG 13:8 Manoah prayed to the Lord, “Please, Lord, allow the man sent from God to visit us again, so he can teach us how we should raise the child who will be born.”
JDG 13:9 God answered Manoah’s prayer. God’s angelic messenger visited the woman again while she was sitting in the field. But her husband Manoah was not with her.
JDG 13:10 The woman ran at once and told her husband, “Come quickly, the man who visited me the other day has appeared to me!”
JDG 13:11 So Manoah got up and followed his wife. When he met the man, he said to him, “Are you the man who spoke to my wife?” He said, “Yes.”
JDG 13:12 Manoah said, “Now, when your announcement comes true, how should the child be raised and what should he do?”
JDG 13:13 The Lord’s messenger told Manoah, “Your wife should pay attention to everything I told her.
JDG 13:14 She should not drink anything that the grapevine produces. She must not drink wine or beer, and she must not eat any food that will make her ritually unclean. She should obey everything I commanded her to do.”
JDG 13:15 Manoah said to the Lord’s messenger, “Please stay here awhile, so we can prepare a young goat for you to eat.”
JDG 13:16 The Lord’s messenger said to Manoah, “If I stay, I will not eat your food. But if you want to make a burnt sacrifice to the Lord, you should offer it.” (He said this because Manoah did not know that he was the Lord’s messenger.)
JDG 13:17 Manoah said to the Lord’s messenger, “Tell us your name, so we can honor you when your announcement comes true.”
JDG 13:18 The Lord’s messenger said to him, “You should not ask me my name, because you cannot comprehend it.”
JDG 13:19 Manoah took a young goat and a grain offering and offered them on a rock to the Lord. The Lord’s messenger did an amazing thing as Manoah and his wife watched.
JDG 13:20 As the flame went up from the altar toward the sky, the Lord’s messenger went up in it while Manoah and his wife watched. They fell facedown to the ground.
JDG 13:21 The Lord’s messenger did not appear again to Manoah and his wife. After all this happened Manoah realized that the visitor had been the Lord’s messenger.
JDG 13:22 Manoah said to his wife, “We will certainly die, because we have seen a supernatural being!”
JDG 13:23 But his wife said to him, “If the Lord wanted to kill us, he would not have accepted the burnt offering and the grain offering from us. He would not have shown us all these things, or have spoken to us like this just now.”
JDG 13:24 Manoah’s wife gave birth to a son and named him Samson. The child grew and the Lord empowered him.
JDG 13:25 The Lord’s spirit began to control him in Mahaneh Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.
JDG 14:1 Samson went down to Timnah, where a Philistine girl caught his eye.
JDG 14:2 When he got home, he told his father and mother, “A Philistine girl in Timnah has caught my eye. Now get her for my wife.”
JDG 14:3 But his father and mother said to him, “Certainly you can find a wife among your relatives or among all our people! You should not have to go and get a wife from the uncircumcised Philistines.” But Samson said to his father, “Get her for me, because she is the right one for me.”
JDG 14:4 Now his father and mother did not realize this was the Lord’s doing, because he was looking for an opportunity to stir up trouble with the Philistines (for at that time the Philistines were ruling Israel).
JDG 14:5 Samson went down to Timnah. When he approached the vineyards of Timnah, he saw a roaring young lion attacking him.
JDG 14:6 The Lord’s spirit empowered him and he tore the lion in two with his bare hands as easily as one would tear a young goat. But he did not tell his father or mother what he had done.
JDG 14:7 Samson continued on down to Timnah and spoke to the girl. In his opinion, she was just the right one.
JDG 14:8 Some time later, when he went back to marry her, he turned aside to see the lion’s remains. He saw a swarm of bees in the lion’s carcass, as well as some honey.
JDG 14:9 He scooped it up with his hands and ate it as he walked along. When he returned to his father and mother, he offered them some and they ate it. But he did not tell them he had scooped the honey out of the lion’s carcass.
JDG 14:10 Then Samson’s father accompanied him to Timnah for the marriage. Samson hosted a party there, for this was customary for bridegrooms to do.
JDG 14:11 When the Philistines saw he had no attendants, they gave him thirty groomsmen who kept him company.
JDG 14:12 Samson said to them, “I will give you a riddle. If you really can solve it during the seven days the party lasts, I will give you thirty linen robes and thirty sets of clothes.
JDG 14:13 But if you cannot solve it, you will give me thirty linen robes and thirty sets of clothes.” They said to him, “Let us hear your riddle.”
JDG 14:14 He said to them, “Out of the one who eats came something to eat; out of the strong one came something sweet.” They could not solve the riddle for three days.
JDG 14:15 On the fourth day they said to Samson’s bride, “Trick your husband into giving the solution to the riddle. If you refuse, we will burn up you and your father’s family. Did you invite us here to make us poor?”
JDG 14:16 So Samson’s bride cried on his shoulder and said, “You must hate me; you do not love me! You told the young men a riddle, but you have not told me the solution.” He said to her, “Look, I have not even told my father or mother. Do you really expect me to tell you?”
JDG 14:17 She cried on his shoulder until the party was almost over. Finally, on the seventh day, he told her because she had nagged him so much. Then she told the young men the solution to the riddle.
JDG 14:18 On the seventh day, before the sun set, the men of the city said to him, “What is sweeter than honey? What is stronger than a lion?” He said to them, “If you had not plowed with my heifer, you would not have solved my riddle!”
JDG 14:19 The Lord’s spirit empowered him. He went down to Ashkelon and murdered thirty men. He took their clothes and gave them to the men who had solved the riddle. He was furious as he went back home.
JDG 14:20 Samson’s bride was then given to his best man.
JDG 15:1 Sometime later, during the wheat harvest, Samson took a young goat as a gift and went to visit his bride. He said to her father, “I want to have sex with my bride in her bedroom!” But her father would not let him enter.
JDG 15:2 Her father said, “I really thought you absolutely despised her, so I gave her to your best man. Her younger sister is more attractive than she is. Take her instead!”
JDG 15:3 Samson said to them, “This time I am justified in doing the Philistines harm!”
JDG 15:4 Samson went and captured three hundred jackals and got some torches. He tied the jackals in pairs by their tails and then tied a torch to each pair.
JDG 15:5 He lit the torches and set the jackals loose in the Philistines’ standing grain. He burned up the grain heaps and the standing grain, as well as the vineyards and olive groves.
JDG 15:6 The Philistines asked, “Who did this?” They were told, “Samson, the Timnite’s son-in-law, because the Timnite took Samson’s bride and gave her to his best man.” So the Philistines went up and burned her and her father.
JDG 15:7 Samson said to them, “Because you did this, I will get revenge against you before I quit fighting.”
JDG 15:8 He struck them down and defeated them. Then he went down and lived for a time in the cave in the cliff of Etam.
JDG 15:9 The Philistines went up and invaded Judah. They arrayed themselves for battle in Lehi.
JDG 15:10 The men of Judah said, “Why are you attacking us?” The Philistines said, “We have come up to take Samson prisoner so we can do to him what he has done to us.”
JDG 15:11 Three thousand men of Judah went down to the cave in the cliff of Etam and said to Samson, “Do you not know that the Philistines rule over us? Why have you done this to us?” He said to them, “I have only done to them what they have done to me.”
JDG 15:12 They said to him, “We have come down to take you prisoner so we can hand you over to the Philistines.” Samson said to them, “Promise me you will not kill me.”
JDG 15:13 They said to him, “We promise! We will only take you prisoner and hand you over to them. We promise not to kill you.” They tied him up with two brand new ropes and led him up from the cliff.
JDG 15:14 When he arrived in Lehi, the Philistines shouted as they approached him. But the Lord’s spirit empowered him. The ropes around his arms were like flax dissolving in fire, and they melted away from his hands.
JDG 15:15 He happened to see a solid jawbone of a donkey. He grabbed it and struck down a thousand men.
JDG 15:16 Samson then said, “With the jawbone of a donkey I have left them in heaps; with the jawbone of a donkey I have struck down a thousand men!”
JDG 15:17 When he finished speaking, he threw the jawbone down and named that place Ramath Lehi.
JDG 15:18 He was very thirsty, so he cried out to the Lord and said, “You have given your servant this great victory. But now must I die of thirst and fall into hands of the Philistines?”
JDG 15:19 So God split open the basin at Lehi and water flowed out from it. When he took a drink, his strength was restored and he revived. For this reason he named the spring En Hakkore. It remains in Lehi to this very day.
JDG 15:20 Samson led Israel for twenty years during the days of Philistine prominence.
JDG 16:1 Samson went to Gaza. There he saw a prostitute and went in to have sex with her.
JDG 16:2 The Gazites were told, “Samson has come here!” So they surrounded the town and hid all night at the city gate, waiting for him to leave. They relaxed all night, thinking, “He will not leave until morning comes; then we will kill him!”
JDG 16:3 Samson spent half the night with the prostitute; then he got up in the middle of the night and left. He grabbed the doors of the city gate, as well as the two posts, and pulled them right off, bar and all. He put them on his shoulders and carried them up to the top of a hill east of Hebron.
JDG 16:4 After this Samson fell in love with a woman named Delilah, who lived in the Sorek Valley.
JDG 16:5 The rulers of the Philistines went up to visit her and said to her, “Trick him! Find out what makes him so strong and how we can subdue him and humiliate him. Each one of us will give you eleven hundred silver pieces.”
JDG 16:6 So Delilah said to Samson, “Tell me what makes you so strong and how you can be subdued and humiliated.”
JDG 16:7 Samson said to her, “If they tie me up with seven fresh bowstrings that have not been dried, I will become weak and be just like any other man.”
JDG 16:8 So the rulers of the Philistines brought her seven fresh bowstrings which had not been dried and they tied him up with them.
JDG 16:9 They hid in the bedroom and then she said to him, “The Philistines are here, Samson!” He snapped the bowstrings as easily as a thread of yarn snaps when it is put close to fire. The secret of his strength was not discovered.
JDG 16:10 Delilah said to Samson, “Look, you deceived me and told me lies! Now tell me how you can be subdued.”
JDG 16:11 He said to her, “If they tie me tightly with brand new ropes that have never been used, I will become weak and be just like any other man.”
JDG 16:12 So Delilah took new ropes and tied him with them and said to him, “The Philistines are here, Samson!” (The Philistines were hiding in the bedroom.) But he tore the ropes from his arms as if they were a piece of thread.
JDG 16:13 Delilah said to Samson, “Up to now you have deceived me and told me lies. Tell me how you can be subdued.” He said to her, “If you weave the seven braids of my hair into the fabric on the loom and secure it with the pin, I will become weak and be like any other man.”
JDG 16:14 So she made him go to sleep, wove the seven braids of his hair into the fabric on the loom, fastened it with the pin, and said to him, “The Philistines are here, Samson!” He woke up and tore away the pin of the loom and the fabric.
JDG 16:15 She said to him, “How can you say, ‘I love you,’ when you will not share your secret with me? Three times you have deceived me and have not told me what makes you so strong.”
JDG 16:16 She nagged him every day and pressured him until he was sick to death of it.
JDG 16:17 Finally he told her his secret. He said to her, “My hair has never been cut, for I have been dedicated to God from the time I was conceived. If my head were shaved, my strength would leave me; I would become weak, and be just like all other men.”
JDG 16:18 When Delilah saw that he had told her his secret, she sent for the rulers of the Philistines, saying, “Come up here again, for he has told me his secret.” So the rulers of the Philistines went up to visit her, bringing the silver in their hands.
JDG 16:19 She made him go to sleep on her lap and then called a man in to shave off the seven braids of his hair. She made him vulnerable and his strength left him.
JDG 16:20 She said, “The Philistines are here, Samson!” He woke up and thought, “I will do as I did before and shake myself free.” But he did not realize that the Lord had left him.
JDG 16:21 The Philistines captured him and gouged out his eyes. They brought him down to Gaza and bound him in bronze chains. He became a grinder in the prison.
JDG 16:22 His hair began to grow back after it had been shaved off.
JDG 16:23 The rulers of the Philistines gathered to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their god and to celebrate. They said, “Our god has handed Samson, our enemy, over to us.”
JDG 16:24 When the people saw him, they praised their god, saying, “Our god has handed our enemy over to us, the one who ruined our land and killed so many of us!”
JDG 16:25 When they really started celebrating, they said, “Call for Samson so he can entertain us!” So they summoned Samson from the prison and he entertained them. They made him stand between two pillars.
JDG 16:26 Samson said to the young man who held his hand, “Position me so I can touch the pillars that support the temple. Then I can lean on them.”
JDG 16:27 Now the temple was filled with men and women, and all the rulers of the Philistines were there. There were three thousand men and women on the roof watching Samson entertain.
JDG 16:28 Samson called to the Lord, “O Master, Lord, remember me! Strengthen me just one more time, O God, so I can get swift revenge against the Philistines for my two eyes!”
JDG 16:29 Samson took hold of the two middle pillars that supported the temple and he leaned against them, with his right hand on one and his left hand on the other.
JDG 16:30 Samson said, “Let me die with the Philistines!” He pushed hard and the temple collapsed on the rulers and all the people in it. He killed many more people in his death than he had killed during his life.
JDG 16:31 His brothers and all his family went down and brought him back. They buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the tomb of Manoah his father. He had led Israel for twenty years.
JDG 17:1 There was a man named Micah from the Ephraimite hill country.
JDG 17:2 He said to his mother, “You know the eleven hundred pieces of silver which were stolen from you, about which I heard you pronounce a curse? Look here, I have the silver. I stole it, but now I am giving it back to you.” His mother said, “May the Lord reward you, my son!”
JDG 17:3 When he gave back to his mother the eleven hundred pieces of silver, his mother said, “I solemnly dedicate this silver to the Lord. It will be for my son’s benefit. We will use it to make a carved image and a metal image.”
JDG 17:4 When he gave the silver back to his mother, she took two hundred pieces of silver to a silversmith, who made them into a carved image and a metal image. She then put them in Micah’s house.
JDG 17:5 Now this man Micah owned a shrine. He made an ephod and some personal idols and hired one of his sons to serve as a priest.
JDG 17:6 In those days Israel had no king. Each man did what he considered to be right.
JDG 17:7 There was a young man from Bethlehem in Judah. He was a Levite who had been temporarily residing among the tribe of Judah.
JDG 17:8 This man left the town of Bethlehem in Judah to find another place to live. He came to the Ephraimite hill country and made his way to Micah’s house.
JDG 17:9 Micah said to him, “Where do you come from?” He replied, “I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah. I am looking for a new place to live.”
JDG 17:10 Micah said to him, “Stay with me. Become my adviser and priest. I will give you ten pieces of silver per year, plus clothes and food.”
JDG 17:11 So the Levite agreed to stay with the man; the young man was like a son to Micah.
JDG 17:12 Micah paid the Levite; the young man became his priest and lived in Micah’s house.
JDG 17:13 Micah said, “Now I know God will make me rich, because I have this Levite as my priest.”
JDG 18:1 In those days Israel had no king. And in those days the Danite tribe was looking for a place to settle, because at that time they did not yet have a place to call their own among the tribes of Israel.
JDG 18:2 The Danites sent out from their whole tribe five representatives, capable men from Zorah and Eshtaol, to spy out the land and explore it. They said to them, “Go, explore the land.” They came to the Ephraimite hill country and spent the night at Micah’s house.
JDG 18:3 As they approached Micah’s house, they recognized the accent of the young Levite. So they stopped there and said to him, “Who brought you here? What are you doing in this place? What is your business here?”
JDG 18:4 He told them what Micah had done for him, saying, “He hired me and I became his priest.”
JDG 18:5 They said to him, “Seek a divine oracle for us, so we can know if we will be successful on our mission.”
JDG 18:6 The priest said to them, “Go with confidence. The Lord will be with you on your mission.”
JDG 18:7 So the five men journeyed on and arrived in Laish. They noticed that the people there were living securely, like the Sidonians do, undisturbed and unsuspecting. No conqueror was troubling them in any way. They lived far from the Sidonians and had no dealings with anyone.
JDG 18:8 When the Danites returned to their tribe in Zorah and Eshtaol, their kinsmen asked them, “How did it go?”
JDG 18:9 They said, “Come on, let’s attack them, for we saw their land and it is very good. You seem lethargic, but don’t hesitate to invade and conquer the land.
JDG 18:10 When you invade, you will encounter unsuspecting people. The land is wide! God is handing it over to you – a place that lacks nothing on earth!”
JDG 18:11 So six hundred Danites, fully armed, set out from Zorah and Eshtaol.
JDG 18:12 They went up and camped in Kiriath Jearim in Judah. (To this day that place is called Camp of Dan. It is west of Kiriath Jearim.)
JDG 18:13 From there they traveled through the Ephraimite hill country and arrived at Micah’s house.
JDG 18:14 The five men who had gone to spy out the land of Laish said to their kinsmen, “Do you realize that inside these houses are an ephod, some personal idols, a carved image, and a metal image? Decide now what you want to do.”
JDG 18:15 They stopped there, went inside the young Levite’s house (which belonged to Micah), and asked him how he was doing.
JDG 18:16 Meanwhile the six hundred Danites, fully armed, stood at the entrance to the gate.
JDG 18:17 The five men who had gone to spy out the land broke in and stole the carved image, the ephod, the personal idols, and the metal image, while the priest was standing at the entrance to the gate with the six hundred fully armed men.
JDG 18:18 When these men broke into Micah’s house and stole the carved image, the ephod, the personal idols, and the metal image, the priest said to them, “What are you doing?”
JDG 18:19 They said to him, “Shut up! Put your hand over your mouth and come with us! You can be our adviser and priest. Wouldn’t it be better to be a priest for a whole Israelite tribe than for just one man’s family?”
JDG 18:20 The priest was happy. He took the ephod, the personal idols, and the carved image and joined the group.
JDG 18:21 They turned and went on their way, but they walked behind the children, the cattle, and their possessions.
JDG 18:22 After they had gone a good distance from Micah’s house, Micah’s neighbors gathered together and caught up with the Danites.
JDG 18:23 When they called out to the Danites, the Danites turned around and said to Micah, “Why have you gathered together?”
JDG 18:24 He said, “You stole my gods that I made, as well as this priest, and then went away. What do I have left? How can you have the audacity to say to me, ‘What do you want?’”
JDG 18:25 The Danites said to him, “Don’t say another word to us, or some very angry men will attack you, and you and your family will die.”
JDG 18:26 The Danites went on their way; when Micah realized they were too strong to resist, he turned around and went home.
JDG 18:27 Now the Danites took what Micah had made, as well as his priest, and came to Laish, where the people were undisturbed and unsuspecting. They struck them down with the sword and burned the city.
JDG 18:28 No one came to the rescue because the city was far from Sidon and they had no dealings with anyone. The city was in a valley near Beth Rehob. The Danites rebuilt the city and occupied it.
JDG 18:29 They named it Dan after their ancestor, who was one of Israel’s sons. But the city’s name used to be Laish.
JDG 18:30 The Danites worshiped the carved image. Jonathan, descendant of Gershom, son of Moses, and his descendants served as priests for the tribe of Dan until the time of the exile.
JDG 18:31 They worshiped Micah’s carved image the whole time God’s authorized shrine was in Shiloh.
JDG 19:1 In those days Israel had no king. There was a Levite living temporarily in the remote region of the Ephraimite hill country. He acquired a concubine from Bethlehem in Judah.
JDG 19:2 However, she got angry at him and went home to her father’s house in Bethlehem in Judah. When she had been there four months,
JDG 19:3 her husband came after her, hoping he could convince her to return. He brought with him his servant and a pair of donkeys. When she brought him into her father’s house and the girl’s father saw him, he greeted him warmly.
JDG 19:4 His father-in-law, the girl’s father, persuaded him to stay with him for three days, and they ate and drank together, and spent the night there.
JDG 19:5 On the fourth day they woke up early and the Levite got ready to leave. But the girl’s father said to his son-in-law, “Have a bite to eat for some energy, then you can go.”
JDG 19:6 So the two of them sat down and had a meal together. Then the girl’s father said to the man, “Why not stay another night and have a good time!”
JDG 19:7 When the man got ready to leave, his father-in-law convinced him to stay another night.
JDG 19:8 He woke up early in the morning on the fifth day so he could leave, but the girl’s father said, “Get some energy. Wait until later in the day to leave!” So they ate a meal together.
JDG 19:9 When the man got ready to leave with his concubine and his servant, his father-in-law, the girl’s father, said to him, “Look! The day is almost over! Stay another night! Since the day is over, stay another night here and have a good time. You can get up early tomorrow and start your trip home.”
JDG 19:10 But the man did not want to stay another night. He left and traveled as far as Jebus (that is, Jerusalem). He had with him a pair of saddled donkeys and his concubine.
JDG 19:11 When they got near Jebus, it was getting quite late and the servant said to his master, “Come on, let’s stop at this Jebusite city and spend the night in it.”
JDG 19:12 But his master said to him, “We should not stop at a foreign city where non-Israelites live. We will travel on to Gibeah.”
JDG 19:13 He said to his servant, “Come on, we will go into one of the other towns and spend the night in Gibeah or Ramah.”
JDG 19:14 So they traveled on, and the sun went down when they were near Gibeah in the territory of Benjamin.
JDG 19:15 They stopped there and decided to spend the night in Gibeah. They came into the city and sat down in the town square, but no one invited them to spend the night.
JDG 19:16 But then an old man passed by, returning at the end of the day from his work in the field. The man was from the Ephraimite hill country; he was living temporarily in Gibeah. (The residents of the town were Benjaminites.)
JDG 19:17 When he looked up and saw the traveler in the town square, the old man said, “Where are you heading? Where do you come from?”
JDG 19:18 The Levite said to him, “We are traveling from Bethlehem in Judah to the remote region of the Ephraimite hill country. That’s where I’m from. I had business in Bethlehem in Judah, but now I’m heading home. But no one has invited me into their home.
JDG 19:19 We have enough straw and grain for our donkeys, and there is enough food and wine for me, your female servant, and the young man who is with your servants. We lack nothing.”
JDG 19:20 The old man said, “Everything is just fine! I will take care of all your needs. But don’t spend the night in the town square.”
JDG 19:21 So he brought him to his house and fed the donkeys. They washed their feet and had a meal.
JDG 19:22 They were having a good time, when suddenly some men of the city, some good-for-nothings, surrounded the house and kept beating on the door. They said to the old man who owned the house, “Send out the man who came to visit you so we can have sex with him.”
JDG 19:23 The man who owned the house went outside and said to them, “No, my brothers! Don’t do this wicked thing! After all, this man is a guest in my house. Don’t do such a disgraceful thing!
JDG 19:24 Here are my virgin daughter and my guest’s concubine. I will send them out and you can abuse them and do to them whatever you like. But don’t do such a disgraceful thing to this man!”
JDG 19:25 The men refused to listen to him, so the Levite grabbed his concubine and made her go outside. They raped her and abused her all night long until morning. They let her go at dawn.
JDG 19:26 The woman arrived back at daybreak and was sprawled out on the doorstep of the house where her master was staying until it became light.
JDG 19:27 When her master got up in the morning, opened the doors of the house, and went outside to start on his journey, there was the woman, his concubine, sprawled out on the doorstep of the house with her hands on the threshold.
JDG 19:28 He said to her, “Get up, let’s leave!” But there was no response. He put her on the donkey and went home.
JDG 19:29 When he got home, he took a knife, grabbed his concubine, and carved her up into twelve pieces. Then he sent the pieces throughout Israel.
JDG 19:30 Everyone who saw the sight said, “Nothing like this has happened or been witnessed during the entire time since the Israelites left the land of Egypt! Take careful note of it! Discuss it and speak!”
JDG 20:1 All the Israelites from Dan to Beer Sheba and from the land of Gilead left their homes and assembled together before the Lord at Mizpah.
JDG 20:2 The leaders of all the people from all the tribes of Israel took their places in the assembly of God’s people, which numbered four hundred thousand sword-wielding foot soldiers.
JDG 20:3 The Benjaminites heard that the Israelites had gone up to Mizpah. Then the Israelites said, “Explain how this wicked thing happened!”
JDG 20:4 The Levite, the husband of the murdered woman, spoke up, “I and my concubine stopped in Gibeah in the territory of Benjamin to spend the night.
JDG 20:5 The leaders of Gibeah attacked me and at night surrounded the house where I was staying. They wanted to kill me; instead they abused my concubine so badly that she died.
JDG 20:6 I grabbed hold of my concubine and carved her up and sent the pieces throughout the territory occupied by Israel, because they committed such an unthinkable atrocity in Israel.
JDG 20:7 All you Israelites, make a decision here!”
JDG 20:8 All Israel rose up in unison and said, “Not one of us will go home! Not one of us will return to his house!
JDG 20:9 Now this is what we will do to Gibeah: We will attack the city as the lot dictates.
JDG 20:10 We will take ten of every group of a hundred men from all the tribes of Israel (and a hundred of every group of a thousand, and a thousand of every group of ten thousand) to get supplies for the army. When they arrive in Gibeah of Benjamin they will punish them for the atrocity which they committed in Israel.”
JDG 20:11 So all the men of Israel gathered together at the city as allies.
JDG 20:12 The tribes of Israel sent men throughout the tribe of Benjamin, saying, “How could such a wicked thing take place?
JDG 20:13 Now, hand over the good-for-nothings in Gibeah so we can execute them and purge Israel of wickedness.” But the Benjaminites refused to listen to their Israelite brothers.
JDG 20:14 The Benjaminites came from their cities and assembled at Gibeah to make war against the Israelites.
JDG 20:15 That day the Benjaminites mustered from their cities twenty-six thousand sword-wielding soldiers, besides seven hundred well-trained soldiers from Gibeah.
JDG 20:16 Among this army were seven hundred specially-trained left-handed soldiers. Each one could sling a stone and hit even the smallest target.
JDG 20:17 The men of Israel (not counting Benjamin) had mustered four hundred thousand sword-wielding soldiers, every one an experienced warrior.
JDG 20:18 The Israelites went up to Bethel and asked God, “Who should lead the charge against the Benjaminites?” The Lord said, “Judah should lead.”
JDG 20:19 The Israelites got up the next morning and moved against Gibeah.
JDG 20:20 The men of Israel marched out to fight Benjamin; they arranged their battle lines against Gibeah.
JDG 20:21 The Benjaminites attacked from Gibeah and struck down twenty-two thousand Israelites that day.
JDG 20:22 The Israelite army took heart and once more arranged their battle lines, in the same place where they had taken their positions the day before.
JDG 20:23 The Israelites went up and wept before the Lord until evening. They asked the Lord, “Should we again march out to fight the Benjaminites, our brothers?” The Lord said, “Attack them!”
JDG 20:24 So the Israelites marched toward the Benjaminites the next day.
JDG 20:25 The Benjaminites again attacked them from Gibeah and struck down eighteen thousand sword-wielding Israelite soldiers.
JDG 20:26 So all the Israelites, the whole army, went up to Bethel. They wept and sat there before the Lord; they did not eat anything that day until evening. They offered up burnt sacrifices and tokens of peace to the Lord.
JDG 20:27 The Israelites asked the Lord (for the ark of God’s covenant was there in those days;
JDG 20:28 Phinehas son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, was serving the Lord in those days), “Should we once more march out to fight the Benjaminites our brothers, or should we quit?” The Lord said, “Attack, for tomorrow I will hand them over to you.”
JDG 20:29 So Israel hid men in ambush outside Gibeah.
JDG 20:30 The Israelites attacked the Benjaminites the next day; they took their positions against Gibeah just as they had done before.
JDG 20:31 The Benjaminites attacked the army, leaving the city unguarded. They began to strike down their enemy just as they had done before. On the main roads (one leads to Bethel, the other to Gibeah) and in the field, they struck down about thirty Israelites.
JDG 20:32 Then the Benjaminites said, “They are defeated just as before.” But the Israelites said, “Let’s retreat and lure them away from the city into the main roads.”
JDG 20:33 All the men of Israel got up from their places and took their positions at Baal Tamar, while the Israelites hiding in ambush jumped out of their places west of Gibeah.
JDG 20:34 Ten thousand men, well-trained soldiers from all Israel, then made a frontal assault against Gibeah – the battle was fierce. But the Benjaminites did not realize that disaster was at their doorstep.
JDG 20:35 The Lord annihilated Benjamin before Israel; the Israelites struck down that day 25,100 sword-wielding Benjaminites.
JDG 20:36 Then the Benjaminites saw they were defeated. The Israelites retreated before Benjamin, because they had confidence in the men they had hid in ambush outside Gibeah.
JDG 20:37 The men hiding in ambush made a mad dash to Gibeah. They attacked and put the sword to the entire city.
JDG 20:38 The Israelites and the men hiding in ambush had arranged a signal. When the men hiding in ambush sent up a smoke signal from the city,
JDG 20:39 the Israelites counterattacked. Benjamin had begun to strike down the Israelites; they struck down about thirty men. They said, “There’s no doubt about it! They are totally defeated as in the earlier battle.”
JDG 20:40 But when the signal, a pillar of smoke, began to rise up from the city, the Benjaminites turned around and saw the whole city going up in a cloud of smoke that rose high into the sky.
JDG 20:41 When the Israelites turned around, the Benjaminites panicked because they could see that disaster was on their doorstep.
JDG 20:42 They retreated before the Israelites, taking the road to the wilderness. But the battle overtook them as men from the surrounding cities struck them down.
JDG 20:43 They surrounded the Benjaminites, chased them from Nohah, and annihilated them all the way to a spot east of Geba.
JDG 20:44 Eighteen thousand Benjaminites, all of them capable warriors, fell dead.
JDG 20:45 The rest turned and ran toward the wilderness, heading toward the cliff of Rimmon. But the Israelites caught five thousand of them on the main roads. They stayed right on their heels all the way to Gidom and struck down two thousand more.
JDG 20:46 That day twenty-five thousand sword-wielding Benjaminites fell in battle, all of them capable warriors.
JDG 20:47 Six hundred survivors turned and ran away to the wilderness, to the cliff of Rimmon. They stayed there four months.
JDG 20:48 The Israelites returned to the Benjaminite towns and put the sword to them. They wiped out the cities, the animals, and everything they could find. They set fire to every city in their path.
JDG 21:1 The Israelites had taken an oath in Mizpah, saying, “Not one of us will allow his daughter to marry a Benjaminite.”
JDG 21:2 So the people came to Bethel and sat there before God until evening, weeping loudly and uncontrollably.
JDG 21:3 They said, “Why, O Lord God of Israel, has this happened in Israel?” An entire tribe has disappeared from Israel today!”
JDG 21:4 The next morning the people got up early and built an altar there. They offered up burnt sacrifices and token of peace.
JDG 21:5 The Israelites asked, “Who from all the Israelite tribes has not assembled before the Lord?” They had made a solemn oath that whoever did not assemble before the Lord at Mizpah must certainly be executed.
JDG 21:6 The Israelites regretted what had happened to their brother Benjamin. They said, “Today we cut off an entire tribe from Israel!
JDG 21:7 How can we find wives for those who are left? After all, we took an oath in the Lord’s name not to give them our daughters as wives.”
JDG 21:8 So they asked, “Who from all the Israelite tribes did not assemble before the Lord at Mizpah?” Now it just so happened no one from Jabesh Gilead had come to the gathering.
JDG 21:9 When they took roll call, they noticed none of the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead were there.
JDG 21:10 So the assembly sent 12,000 capable warriors against Jabesh Gilead. They commanded them, “Go and kill with your swords the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead, including the women and little children.
JDG 21:11 Do this: exterminate every male, as well as every woman who has had sexual relations with a male. But spare the lives of any virgins.” So they did as instructed.
JDG 21:12 They found among the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead four hundred young girls who were virgins – they had never had sexual relations with a male. They brought them back to the camp at Shiloh in the land of Canaan.
JDG 21:13 The entire assembly sent messengers to the Benjaminites at the cliff of Rimmon and assured them they would not be harmed.
JDG 21:14 The Benjaminites returned at that time, and the Israelites gave to them the women they had spared from Jabesh Gilead. But there were not enough to go around.
JDG 21:15 The people regretted what had happened to Benjamin because the Lord had weakened the Israelite tribes.
JDG 21:16 The leaders of the assembly said, “How can we find wives for those who are left? After all, the Benjaminite women have been wiped out.
JDG 21:17 The remnant of Benjamin must be preserved. An entire Israelite tribe should not be wiped out.
JDG 21:18 But we can’t allow our daughters to marry them, for the Israelites took an oath, saying, ‘Whoever gives a woman to a Benjaminite will be destroyed!’
JDG 21:19 However, there is an annual festival to the Lord in Shiloh, which is north of Bethel (east of the main road that goes up from Bethel to Shechem) and south of Lebonah.”
JDG 21:20 So they commanded the Benjaminites, “Go hide in the vineyards,
JDG 21:21 and keep your eyes open. When you see the daughters of Shiloh coming out to dance in the celebration, jump out from the vineyards. Each one of you, catch yourself a wife from among the daughters of Shiloh and then go home to the land of Benjamin.
JDG 21:22 When their fathers or brothers come and protest to us, we’ll say to them, “Do us a favor and let them be, for we could not get each one a wife through battle. Don’t worry about breaking your oath! You would only be guilty if you had voluntarily given them wives.’”
JDG 21:23 The Benjaminites did as instructed. They abducted two hundred of the dancing girls to be their wives. They went home to their own territory, rebuilt their cities, and settled down.
JDG 21:24 Then the Israelites dispersed from there to their respective tribal and clan territories. Each went from there to his own property.
JDG 21:25 In those days Israel had no king. Each man did what he considered to be right.
RUT 1:1 During the time of the judges there was a famine in the land of Judah. So a man from Bethlehem in Judah went to live as a resident foreigner in the region of Moab, along with his wife and two sons.
RUT 1:2 (Now the man’s name was Elimelech, his wife was Naomi, and his two sons were Mahlon and Kilion. They were of the clan of Ephrath from Bethlehem in Judah.) They entered the region of Moab and settled there.
RUT 1:3 Sometime later Naomi’s husband Elimelech died, so she and her two sons were left alone.
RUT 1:4 So her sons married Moabite women. (One was named Orpah and the other Ruth.) And they continued to live there about ten years.
RUT 1:5 Then Naomi’s two sons, Mahlon and Kilion, also died. So the woman was left all alone – bereaved of her two children as well as her husband!
RUT 1:6 So she decided to return home from the region of Moab, accompanied by her daughters-in-law, because while she was living in Moab she had heard that the Lord had shown concern for his people, reversing the famine by providing abundant crops.
RUT 1:7 Now as she and her two daughters-in-law began to leave the place where she had been living to return to the land of Judah,
RUT 1:8 Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, “Listen to me! Each of you should return to your mother’s home! May the Lord show you the same kind of devotion that you have shown to your deceased husbands and to me!
RUT 1:9 May the Lord enable each of you to find security in the home of a new husband!” Then she kissed them goodbye and they wept loudly.
RUT 1:10 But they said to her, “No! We will return with you to your people.”
RUT 1:11 But Naomi replied, “Go back home, my daughters! There is no reason for you to return to Judah with me! I am no longer capable of giving birth to sons who might become your husbands!
RUT 1:12 Go back home, my daughters! For I am too old to get married again. Even if I thought that there was hope that I could get married tonight and conceive sons,
RUT 1:13 surely you would not want to wait until they were old enough to marry! Surely you would not remain unmarried all that time! No, my daughters, you must not return with me. For my intense suffering is too much for you to bear. For the Lord is afflicting me!”
RUT 1:14 Again they wept loudly. Then Orpah kissed her mother-in-law goodbye, but Ruth clung tightly to her.
RUT 1:15 So Naomi said, “Look, your sister-in-law is returning to her people and to her god. Follow your sister-in-law back home!”
RUT 1:16 But Ruth replied, “Stop urging me to abandon you! For wherever you go, I will go. Wherever you live, I will live. Your people will become my people, and your God will become my God.
RUT 1:17 Wherever you die, I will die – and there I will be buried. May the Lord punish me severely if I do not keep my promise! Only death will be able to separate me from you!”
RUT 1:18 When Naomi realized that Ruth was determined to go with her, she stopped trying to dissuade her.
RUT 1:19 So the two of them journeyed together until they arrived in Bethlehem. When they entered Bethlehem, the whole village was excited about their arrival. The women of the village said, “Can this be Naomi?”
RUT 1:20 But she replied to them, “Don’t call me ‘Naomi’! Call me ‘Mara’ because the Sovereign One has treated me very harshly.
RUT 1:21 I left here full, but the Lord has caused me to return empty-handed. Why do you call me ‘Naomi,’ seeing that the Lord has opposed me, and the Sovereign One has caused me to suffer?”
RUT 1:22 So Naomi returned, accompanied by her Moabite daughter-in-law Ruth, who came back with her from the region of Moab. (Now they arrived in Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.)
RUT 2:1 Now Naomi had a relative on her husband’s side of the family named Boaz. He was a wealthy, prominent man from the clan of Elimelech.
RUT 2:2 One day Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi, “Let me go to the fields so I can gather grain behind whoever permits me to do so.” Naomi replied, “You may go, my daughter.”
RUT 2:3 So Ruth went and gathered grain in the fields behind the harvesters. Now she just happened to end up in the portion of the field belonging to Boaz, who was from the clan of Elimelech.
RUT 2:4 Now at that very moment, Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and greeted the harvesters, “May the Lord be with you!” They replied, “May the Lord bless you!”
RUT 2:5 Boaz asked his servant in charge of the harvesters, “To whom does this young woman belong?”
RUT 2:6 The servant in charge of the harvesters replied, “She’s the young Moabite woman who came back with Naomi from the region of Moab.
RUT 2:7 She asked, ‘May I follow the harvesters and gather grain among the bundles?’ Since she arrived she has been working hard from this morning until now – except for sitting in the resting hut a short time.”
RUT 2:8 So Boaz said to Ruth, “Listen carefully, my dear! Do not leave to gather grain in another field. You need not go beyond the limits of this field. You may go along beside my female workers.
RUT 2:9 Take note of the field where the men are harvesting and follow behind with the female workers. I will tell the men to leave you alone. When you are thirsty, you may go to the water jars and drink some of the water the servants draw.”
RUT 2:10 Ruth knelt before him with her forehead to the ground and said to him, “Why are you so kind and so attentive to me, even though I am a foreigner?”
RUT 2:11 Boaz replied to her, “I have been given a full report of all that you have done for your mother-in-law following the death of your husband – how you left your father and your mother, as well as your homeland, and came to live among people you did not know previously.
RUT 2:12 May the Lord reward your efforts! May your acts of kindness be repaid fully by the Lord God of Israel, from whom you have sought protection!”
RUT 2:13 She said, “You really are being kind to me, sir, for you have reassured and encouraged me, your servant, even though I am not one of your servants!”
RUT 2:14 Later during the mealtime Boaz said to her, “Come here and have some food! Dip your bread in the vinegar!” So she sat down beside the harvesters. Then he handed her some roasted grain. She ate until she was full and saved the rest.
RUT 2:15 When she got up to gather grain, Boaz told his male servants, “Let her gather grain even among the bundles! Don’t chase her off!
RUT 2:16 Make sure you pull out ears of grain for her and drop them so she can gather them up. Don’t tell her not to!”
RUT 2:17 So she gathered grain in the field until evening. When she threshed what she had gathered, it came to about thirty pounds of barley!
RUT 2:18 She carried it back to town, and her mother-in-law saw how much grain she had gathered. Then Ruth gave her the roasted grain she had saved from mealtime.
RUT 2:19 Her mother-in-law asked her, “Where did you gather grain today? Where did you work? May the one who took notice of you be rewarded!” So Ruth told her mother-in-law with whom she had worked. She said, “The name of the man with whom I worked today is Boaz.”
RUT 2:20 Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, “May he be rewarded by the Lord because he has shown loyalty to the living on behalf of the dead!” Then Naomi said to her, “This man is a close relative of ours; he is our guardian.”
RUT 2:21 Ruth the Moabite replied, “He even told me, ‘You may go along beside my servants until they have finished gathering all my harvest!’”
RUT 2:22 Naomi then said to her daughter-in-law Ruth, “It is good, my daughter, that you should go out to work with his female servants. That way you will not be harmed, which could happen in another field.”
RUT 2:23 So Ruth worked beside Boaz’s female servants, gathering grain until the end of the barley harvest as well as the wheat harvest. After that she stayed home with her mother-in-law.
RUT 3:1 At that time, Naomi, her mother-in-law, said to her, “My daughter, I must find a home for you so you will be secure.
RUT 3:2 Now Boaz, with whose female servants you worked, is our close relative. Look, tonight he is winnowing barley at the threshing floor.
RUT 3:3 So bathe yourself, rub on some perfumed oil, and get dressed up. Then go down to the threshing floor. But don’t let the man know you’re there until he finishes his meal.
RUT 3:4 When he gets ready to go to sleep, take careful notice of the place where he lies down. Then go, uncover his legs, and lie down beside him. He will tell you what you should do.”
RUT 3:5 Ruth replied to Naomi, “I will do everything you have told me to do.”
RUT 3:6 So she went down to the threshing floor and did everything her mother-in-law had instructed her to do.
RUT 3:7 When Boaz had finished his meal and was feeling satisfied, he lay down to sleep at the far end of the grain heap. Then Ruth crept up quietly, uncovered his legs, and lay down beside him.
RUT 3:8 In the middle of the night he was startled and turned over. Now he saw a woman lying beside him!
RUT 3:9 He said, “Who are you?” She replied, “I am Ruth, your servant. Marry your servant, for you are a guardian of the family interests.”
RUT 3:10 He said, “May you be rewarded by the Lord, my dear! This act of devotion is greater than what you did before. For you have not sought to marry one of the young men, whether rich or poor.
RUT 3:11 Now, my dear, don’t worry! I intend to do for you everything you propose, for everyone in the village knows that you are a worthy woman.
RUT 3:12 Now yes, it is true that I am a guardian, but there is another guardian who is a closer relative than I am.
RUT 3:13 Remain here tonight. Then in the morning, if he agrees to marry you, fine, let him do so. But if he does not want to do so, I promise, as surely as the Lord lives, to marry you. Sleep here until morning.”
RUT 3:14 So she slept beside him until morning. She woke up while it was still dark. Boaz thought, “No one must know that a woman visited the threshing floor.”
RUT 3:15 Then he said, “Hold out the shawl you are wearing and grip it tightly.” As she held it tightly, he measured out about sixty pounds of barley into the shawl and put it on her shoulders. Then he went into town,
RUT 3:16 and she returned to her mother-in-law. When Ruth returned to her mother-in-law, Naomi asked, “How did things turn out for you, my daughter?” Ruth told her about all the man had done for her.
RUT 3:17 She said, “He gave me these sixty pounds of barley, for he said to me, ‘Do not go to your mother-in-law empty-handed.’”
RUT 3:18 Then Naomi said, “Stay put, my daughter, until you know how the matter turns out. For the man will not rest until he has taken care of the matter today.”
RUT 4:1 Now Boaz went up to the village gate and sat there. Then along came the guardian whom Boaz had mentioned to Ruth! Boaz said, “Come here and sit down, ‘John Doe’!” So he came and sat down.
RUT 4:2 Boaz chose ten of the village leaders and said, “Sit down here!” So they sat down.
RUT 4:3 Then Boaz said to the guardian, “Naomi, who has returned from the region of Moab, is selling the portion of land that belongs to our relative Elimelech.
RUT 4:4 So I am legally informing you: Acquire it before those sitting here and before the leaders of my people! If you want to exercise your right to redeem it, then do so. But if not, then tell me so I will know. For you possess the first option to redeem it; I am next in line after you.” He replied, “I will redeem it.”
RUT 4:5 Then Boaz said, “When you acquire the field from Naomi, you must also acquire Ruth the Moabite, the wife of our deceased relative, in order to preserve his family name by raising up a descendant who will inherit his property.”
RUT 4:6 The guardian said, “Then I am unable to redeem it, for I would ruin my own inheritance in that case. You may exercise my redemption option, for I am unable to redeem it.”
RUT 4:7 (Now this used to be the customary way to finalize a transaction involving redemption in Israel: A man would remove his sandal and give it to the other party. This was a legally binding act in Israel.)
RUT 4:8 So the guardian said to Boaz, “You may acquire it,” and he removed his sandal.
RUT 4:9 Then Boaz said to the leaders and all the people, “You are witnesses today that I have acquired from Naomi all that belonged to Elimelech, Kilion, and Mahlon.
RUT 4:10 I have also acquired Ruth the Moabite, the wife of Mahlon, as my wife to raise up a descendant who will inherit his property so the name of the deceased might not disappear from among his relatives and from his village. You are witnesses today.”
RUT 4:11 All the people who were at the gate and the elders replied, “We are witnesses. May the Lord make the woman who is entering your home like Rachel and Leah, both of whom built up the house of Israel! May you prosper in Ephrathah and become famous in Bethlehem.
RUT 4:12 May your family become like the family of Perez – whom Tamar bore to Judah – through the descendants the Lord gives you by this young woman.”
RUT 4:13 So Boaz married Ruth and had sexual relations with her. The Lord enabled her to conceive and she gave birth to a son.
RUT 4:14 The village women said to Naomi, “May the Lord be praised because he has not left you without a guardian today! May he become famous in Israel!
RUT 4:15 He will encourage you and provide for you when you are old, for your daughter-in-law, who loves you, has given him birth. She is better to you than seven sons!”
RUT 4:16 Naomi took the child and placed him on her lap; she became his caregiver.
RUT 4:17 The neighbor women named him, saying, “A son has been born to Naomi.” They named him Obed. Now he became the father of Jesse – David’s father!
RUT 4:18 These are the descendants of Perez: Perez was the father of Hezron,
RUT 4:19 Hezron was the father of Ram, Ram was the father of Amminadab,
RUT 4:20 Amminadab was the father of Nachshon, Nachshon was the father of Salmah,
RUT 4:21 Salmon was the father of Boaz, Boaz was the father of Obed,
RUT 4:22 Obed was the father of Jesse, and Jesse was the father of David.
1SA 1:1 There was a man from Ramathaim Zophim, from the hill country of Ephraim, whose name was Elkanah. He was the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite.
1SA 1:2 He had two wives; the name of the first was Hannah and the name of the second was Peninnah. Now Peninnah had children, but Hannah was childless.
1SA 1:3 Year after year this man would go up from his city to worship and to sacrifice to the Lord of hosts at Shiloh. It was there that the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas, served as the Lord’s priests.
1SA 1:4 Whenever the day came for Elkanah to sacrifice, he used to give meat portions to his wife Peninnah and to all her sons and daughters.
1SA 1:5 But he would give a double portion to Hannah, because he especially loved her. Now the Lord had not enabled her to have children.
1SA 1:6 Her rival wife used to upset her and make her worry, for the Lord had not enabled her to have children.
1SA 1:7 Peninnah would behave this way year after year. Whenever Hannah went up to the Lord’s house, Peninnah would upset her so that she would weep and refuse to eat.
1SA 1:8 Finally her husband Elkanah said to her, “Hannah, why do you weep and not eat? Why are you so sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”
1SA 1:9 On one occasion in Shiloh, after they had finished eating and drinking, Hannah got up. (Now at the time Eli the priest was sitting in his chair by the doorpost of the Lord’s temple.)
1SA 1:10 She was very upset as she prayed to the Lord, and she was weeping uncontrollably.
1SA 1:11 She made a vow saying, “O Lord of hosts, if you will look with compassion on the suffering of your female servant, remembering me and not forgetting your servant, and give a male child to your servant, then I will dedicate him to the Lord all the days of his life. His hair will never be cut.”
1SA 1:12 As she continued praying to the Lord, Eli was watching her mouth.
1SA 1:13 Now Hannah was speaking from her heart. Although her lips were moving, her voice was inaudible. Eli therefore thought she was drunk.
1SA 1:14 So he said to her, “How often do you intend to get drunk? Put away your wine!”
1SA 1:15 But Hannah replied, “That’s not the way it is, my lord! I am under a great deal of stress. I have drunk neither wine nor beer. Rather, I have poured out my soul to the Lord.
1SA 1:16 Don’t consider your servant a wicked woman, for until now I have spoken from my deep pain and anguish.”
1SA 1:17 Eli replied, “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant the request that you have asked of him.”
1SA 1:18 She said, “May I, your servant, find favor in your sight.” So the woman went her way and got something to eat. Her face no longer looked sad.
1SA 1:19 They got up early the next morning and after worshiping the Lord, they returned to their home at Ramah. Elkanah had marital relations with his wife Hannah, and the Lord remembered her.
1SA 1:20 After some time Hannah became pregnant and gave birth to a son. She named him Samuel, thinking, “I asked the Lord for him.
1SA 1:21 This man Elkanah went up with all his family to make the yearly sacrifice to the Lord and to keep his vow,
1SA 1:22 but Hannah did not go up with them. Instead she told her husband, “Once the boy is weaned, I will bring him and appear before the Lord, and he will remain there from then on.”
1SA 1:23 So her husband Elkanah said to her, “Do what you think best. Stay until you have weaned him. May the Lord fulfill his promise.” So the woman stayed and nursed her son until she had weaned him.
1SA 1:24 Once she had weaned him, she took him up with her, along with three bulls, an ephah of flour, and a container of wine. She brought him to the Lord’s house at Shiloh, even though he was young.
1SA 1:25 Once the bull had been slaughtered, they brought the boy to Eli.
1SA 1:26 She said, “Just as surely as you are alive, my lord, I am the woman who previously stood here with you in order to pray to the Lord.
1SA 1:27 I prayed for this boy, and the Lord has given me the request that I asked of him.
1SA 1:28 Now I dedicate him to the Lord. From this time on he is dedicated to the Lord.” Then they worshiped the Lord there.
1SA 2:1 Hannah prayed, “My heart rejoices in the Lord; my horn is exalted high because of the Lord. I loudly denounce my enemies, for I am happy that you delivered me.
1SA 2:2 No one is holy like the Lord! There is no one other than you! There is no rock like our God!
1SA 2:3 Don’t keep speaking so arrogantly, letting proud talk come out of your mouth! For the Lord is a God who knows; he evaluates what people do.
1SA 2:4 The bows of warriors are shattered, but those who stumble find their strength reinforced.
1SA 2:5 Those who are well-fed hire themselves out to earn food, but the hungry no longer lack. Even the barren woman gives birth to seven, but the one with many children withers away.
1SA 2:6 The Lord both kills and gives life; he brings down to the grave and raises up.
1SA 2:7 The Lord impoverishes and makes wealthy; he humbles and he exalts.
1SA 2:8 He lifts the weak from the dust; he raises the poor from the ash heap to seat them with princes and to bestow on them an honored position. The foundations of the earth belong to the Lord, and he has placed the world on them.
1SA 2:9 He watches over his holy ones, but the wicked are made speechless in the darkness, for it is not by one’s own strength that one prevails.
1SA 2:10 The Lord shatters his adversaries; he thunders against them from the heavens. The Lord executes judgment to the ends of the earth. He will strengthen his king and exalt the power of his anointed one.”
1SA 2:11 Then Elkanah went back home to Ramah. But the boy was serving the Lord under the supervision of Eli the priest.
1SA 2:12 The sons of Eli were wicked men. They did not recognize the Lord’s authority.
1SA 2:13 Now the priests would always treat the people in the following way: Whenever anyone was making a sacrifice, while the meat was boiling, the priest’s attendant would come with a three-pronged fork in his hand.
1SA 2:14 He would jab it into the basin, kettle, caldron, or pot, and everything that the fork brought up the priest would take for himself. This is what they used to do to all the Israelites when they came there to Shiloh.
1SA 2:15 Even before they burned the fat, the priest’s attendant would come and say to the person who was making the sacrifice, “Hand over some meat for the priest to roast! He won’t take boiled meat from you, but only raw.”
1SA 2:16 If the individual said to him, “First let the fat be burned away, and then take for yourself whatever you wish,” he would say, “No! Hand it over right now! If you don’t, I will take it forcibly!”
1SA 2:17 The sin of these young men was very great in the Lord’s sight, for they treated the Lord’s offering with contempt.
1SA 2:18 Now Samuel was ministering before the Lord. The boy was dressed in a linen ephod.
1SA 2:19 His mother used to make him a small robe and bring it up to him at regular intervals when she would go up with her husband to make the annual sacrifice.
1SA 2:20 Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife saying, “May the Lord raise up for you descendants from this woman to replace the one that she dedicated to the Lord.” Then they would go to their home.
1SA 2:21 So the Lord graciously attended to Hannah, and she was able to conceive and gave birth to three sons and two daughters. The boy Samuel grew up at the Lord’s sanctuary.
1SA 2:22 Now Eli was very old when he heard about everything that his sons used to do to all the people of Israel and how they used to have sex with the women who were stationed at the entrance to the tent of meeting.
1SA 2:23 He said to them, “Why do you behave in this way? For I hear about these evil things from all these people.
1SA 2:24 This ought not to be, my sons! For the report that I hear circulating among the Lord’s people is not good.
1SA 2:25 If a man sins against a man, one may appeal to God on his behalf. But if a man sins against the Lord, who then will intercede for him?” But Eli’s sons would not listen to their father, for the Lord had decided to kill them.
1SA 2:26 Now the boy Samuel was growing up and finding favor both with the Lord and with people.
1SA 2:27 A man of God came to Eli and said to him, “This is what the Lord says: ‘Did I not plainly reveal myself to your ancestor’s house when they were in Egypt in the house of Pharaoh?
1SA 2:28 I chose your ancestor from all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer sacrifice on my altar, to burn incense, and to bear the ephod before me. I gave to your ancestor’s house all the fire offerings made by the Israelites.
1SA 2:29 Why are you scorning my sacrifice and my offering that I commanded for my dwelling place? You have honored your sons more than you have me by having made yourselves fat from the best parts of all the offerings of my people Israel.’
1SA 2:30 Therefore the Lord, the God of Israel, says, ‘I really did say that your house and your ancestor’s house would serve me forever.’ But now the Lord says, ‘May it never be! For I will honor those who honor me, but those who despise me will be cursed!
1SA 2:31 In fact, days are coming when I will remove your strength and the strength of your father’s house. There will not be an old man in your house!
1SA 2:32 You will see trouble in my dwelling place! Israel will experience blessings, but there will not be an old man in your house for all time.
1SA 2:33 Any one of you that I do not cut off from my altar, I will cause your eyes to fail and will cause you grief. All of those born to your family will die in the prime of life.
1SA 2:34 This will be a confirming sign for you that will be fulfilled through your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas: in a single day they both will die!
1SA 2:35 Then I will raise up for myself a faithful priest. He will do what is in my heart and soul. I will build for him a secure dynasty and he will serve my chosen one for all time.
1SA 2:36 Everyone who remains in your house will come to bow before him for a little money and for a scrap of bread. Each will say, ‘Assign me to a priestly task so I can eat a scrap of bread.’”
1SA 3:1 Now the boy Samuel continued serving the Lord under Eli’s supervision. Word from the Lord was rare in those days; revelatory visions were infrequent.
1SA 3:2 Eli’s eyes had begun to fail, so that he was unable to see well. At that time he was lying down in his place,
1SA 3:3 and the lamp of God had not yet been extinguished. Samuel was lying down in the temple of the Lord as well; the ark of God was also there.
1SA 3:4 The Lord called to Samuel, and he replied, “Here I am!”
1SA 3:5 Then he ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But Eli said, “I didn’t call you. Go back and lie down.” So he went back and lay down.
1SA 3:6 The Lord again called, “Samuel!” So Samuel got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But Eli said, “I didn’t call you, my son. Go back and lie down.”
1SA 3:7 Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord; the word of the Lord had not yet been revealed to him.
1SA 3:8 Then the Lord called Samuel a third time. So he got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me!” Eli then realized that it was the Lord who was calling the boy.
1SA 3:9 So Eli said to Samuel, “Go back and lie down. When he calls you, say, “Speak, Lord, for your servant is listening.” So Samuel went back and lay down in his place.
1SA 3:10 Then the Lord came and stood nearby, calling as he had previously done, “Samuel! Samuel!” Samuel replied, “Speak, for your servant is listening!”
1SA 3:11 The Lord said to Samuel, “Look! I am about to do something in Israel; when anyone hears about it, both of his ears will tingle.
1SA 3:12 On that day I will carry out against Eli everything that I spoke about his house – from start to finish!
1SA 3:13 You should tell him that I am about to judge his house forever because of the sin that he knew about. For his sons were cursing God, and he did not rebuke them.
1SA 3:14 Therefore I swore an oath to the house of Eli, ‘The sin of the house of Eli can never be forgiven by sacrifice or by grain offering.’”
1SA 3:15 So Samuel lay down until morning. Then he opened the doors of the Lord’s house. But Samuel was afraid to tell Eli about the vision.
1SA 3:16 However, Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son!” He replied, “Here I am.”
1SA 3:17 Eli said, “What message did he speak to you? Don’t conceal it from me. God will judge you severely if you conceal from me anything that he said to you!”
1SA 3:18 So Samuel told him everything. He did not hold back anything from him. Eli said, “The Lord will do what he pleases.”
1SA 3:19 Samuel continued to grow, and the Lord was with him. None of his prophecies fell to the ground unfulfilled.
1SA 3:20 All Israel from Dan to Beer Sheba realized that Samuel was confirmed as a prophet of the Lord.
1SA 3:21 Then the Lord again appeared in Shiloh, for it was in Shiloh that the Lord had revealed himself to Samuel through the word of the Lord.
1SA 4:1 Samuel revealed the word of the Lord to all Israel. Then the Israelites went out to fight the Philistines. They camped at Ebenezer, and the Philistines camped at Aphek.
1SA 4:2 The Philistines arranged their forces to fight Israel. As the battle spread out, Israel was defeated by the Philistines, who killed about four thousand men in the battle line in the field.
1SA 4:3 When the army came back to the camp, the elders of Israel said, “Why did the Lord let us be defeated today by the Philistines? Let’s take with us the ark of the covenant of the Lord from Shiloh. When it is with us, it will save us from the hand of our enemies.
1SA 4:4 So the army sent to Shiloh, and they took from there the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts who sits between the cherubim. Now the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
1SA 4:5 When the ark of the covenant of the Lord arrived at the camp, all Israel shouted so loudly that the ground shook.
1SA 4:6 When the Philistines heard the sound of the shout, they said, “What is this loud shout in the camp of the Hebrews?” Then they realized that the ark of the Lord had arrived at the camp.
1SA 4:7 The Philistines were scared because they thought that gods had come to the camp. They said, “Too bad for us! We’ve never seen anything like this!
1SA 4:8 Too bad for us! Who can deliver us from the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods who struck the Egyptians with all sorts of plagues in the desert!
1SA 4:9 Be strong and act like men, you Philistines, or else you will wind up serving the Hebrews the way they have served you! Act like men and fight!”
1SA 4:10 So the Philistines fought. Israel was defeated; they all ran home. The slaughter was very great; thirty thousand foot soldiers fell in battle.
1SA 4:11 The ark of God was taken, and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas, were killed.
1SA 4:12 On that day a Benjaminite ran from the battle lines and came to Shiloh. His clothes were torn and dirt was on his head.
1SA 4:13 When he arrived in Shiloh, Eli was sitting in his chair watching by the side of the road, for he was very worried about the ark of God. As the man entered the city to give his report, the whole city cried out.
1SA 4:14 When Eli heard the outcry, he said, “What is this commotion?” The man quickly came and told Eli.
1SA 4:15 Now Eli was ninety-eight years old and his eyes looked straight ahead; he was unable to see.
1SA 4:16 The man said to Eli, “I am the one who came from the battle lines! Just today I fled from the battle lines!” Eli asked, “How did things go, my son?”
1SA 4:17 The messenger replied, “Israel has fled from the Philistines! The army has suffered a great defeat! Your two sons, Hophni and Phineas, are dead! The ark of God has been captured!”
1SA 4:18 When he mentioned the ark of God, Eli fell backward from his chair beside the gate. He broke his neck and died, for he was old and heavy. He had judged Israel for forty years.
1SA 4:19 His daughter-in-law, the wife of Phineas, was pregnant and close to giving birth. When she heard that the ark of God was captured and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she doubled over and gave birth. But her labor pains were too much for her.
1SA 4:20 As she was dying, the women who were there with her said, “Don’t be afraid! You have given birth to a son!” But she did not reply or pay any attention.
1SA 4:21 She named the boy Ichabod, saying, “The glory has departed from Israel,” referring to the capture of the ark of God and the deaths of her father-in-law and her husband.
1SA 4:22 She said, “The glory has departed from Israel, because the ark of God has been captured.”
1SA 5:1 Now the Philistines had captured the ark of God and brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod.
1SA 5:2 The Philistines took the ark of God and brought it into the temple of Dagon, where they positioned it beside Dagon.
1SA 5:3 When the residents of Ashdod got up early the next day, Dagon was lying on the ground before the ark of the Lord. So they took Dagon and set him back in his place.
1SA 5:4 But when they got up early the following day, Dagon was again lying on the ground before the ark of the Lord. The head of Dagon and his two hands were sheared off and were lying at the threshold. Only Dagon’s body was left intact.
1SA 5:5 (For this reason, to this very day, neither Dagon’s priests nor anyone else who enters Dagon’s temple step on Dagon’s threshold in Ashdod.)
1SA 5:6 The Lord attacked the residents of Ashdod severely, bringing devastation on them. He struck the people of both Ashdod and the surrounding area with sores.
1SA 5:7 When the people of Ashdod saw what was happening, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel should not remain with us, for he has attacked both us and our god Dagon!”
1SA 5:8 So they assembled all the leaders of the Philistines and asked, “What should we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” They replied, “The ark of the God of Israel should be moved to Gath.” So they moved the ark of the God of Israel.
1SA 5:9 But after it had been moved the Lord attacked that city as well, causing a great deal of panic. He struck all the people of that city with sores.
1SA 5:10 So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. But when the ark of God arrived at Ekron, the residents of Ekron cried out saying, “They have brought the ark of the God of Israel here to kill our people!”
1SA 5:11 So they assembled all the leaders of the Philistines and said, “Get the ark of the God of Israel out of here! Let it go back to its own place so that it won’t kill us and our people!” The terror of death was throughout the entire city; God was attacking them very severely there.
1SA 5:12 The people who did not die were struck with sores; the city’s cry for help went all the way up to heaven.
1SA 6:1 When the ark of the Lord had been in the land of the Philistines for seven months,
1SA 6:2 the Philistines called the priests and the omen readers, saying, “What should we do with the ark of the Lord? Advise us as to how we should send it back to its place.”
1SA 6:3 They replied, “If you are going to send the ark of the God of Israel back, don’t send it away empty. Be sure to return it with a guilt offering. Then you will be healed, and you will understand why his hand is not removed from you.”
1SA 6:4 They inquired, “What is the guilt offering that we should send to him?” They replied, “The Philistine leaders number five. So send five gold sores and five gold mice, for it is the same plague that has afflicted both you and your leaders.
1SA 6:5 You should make images of the sores and images of the mice that are destroying the land. You should honor the God of Israel. Perhaps he will release his grip on you, your gods, and your land.
1SA 6:6 Why harden your hearts like the Egyptians and Pharaoh did? When God treated them harshly, didn’t the Egyptians send the Israelites on their way?
1SA 6:7 So now go and make a new cart. Get two cows that have calves and that have never had a yoke placed on them. Harness the cows to the cart and take their calves from them back to their stalls.
1SA 6:8 Then take the ark of the Lord and place it on the cart, and put in a chest beside it the gold objects you are sending to him as a guilt offering. You should then send it on its way.
1SA 6:9 But keep an eye on it. If it should go up by the way of its own border to Beth Shemesh, then he has brought this great calamity on us. But if that is not the case, then we will know that it was not his hand that struck us; rather, it just happened to us by accident.”
1SA 6:10 So the men did as instructed. They took two cows that had calves and harnessed them to a cart; they also removed their calves to their stalls.
1SA 6:11 They put the ark of the Lord on the cart, along with the chest, the gold mice, and the images of the sores.
1SA 6:12 Then the cows went directly on the road to Beth Shemesh. They went along, mooing as they went; they turned neither to the right nor to the left. The leaders of the Philistines were walking along behind them all the way to the border of Beth Shemesh.
1SA 6:13 Now the residents of Beth Shemesh were harvesting wheat in the valley. When they looked up and saw the ark, they were pleased at the sight.
1SA 6:14 The cart was coming to the field of Joshua, who was from Beth Shemesh. It paused there near a big stone. Then they cut up the wood of the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the Lord.
1SA 6:15 The Levites took down the ark of the Lord and the chest that was with it, which contained the gold objects. They placed them near the big stone. At that time the people of Beth Shemesh offered burnt offerings and made sacrifices to the Lord.
1SA 6:16 The five leaders of the Philistines watched what was happening and then returned to Ekron on the same day.
1SA 6:17 These are the gold sores that the Philistines brought as a guilt offering to the Lord – one for each of the following cities: Ashdod, Gaza, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron.
1SA 6:18 The gold mice corresponded in number to all the Philistine cities of the five leaders, from the fortified cities to hamlet villages, to greater Abel, where they positioned the ark of the Lord until this very day in the field of Joshua who was from Beth Shemesh.
1SA 6:19 But the Lord struck down some of the people of Beth Shemesh because they had looked into the ark of the Lord; he struck down 50,070 of the men. The people grieved because the Lord had struck the people with a hard blow.
1SA 6:20 The residents of Beth Shemesh asked, “Who is able to stand before the Lord, this holy God? To whom will the ark go up from here?”
1SA 6:21 So they sent messengers to the residents of Kiriath Jearim, saying, “The Philistines have returned the ark of the Lord. Come down here and take it back home with you.”
1SA 7:1 Then the people of Kiriath Jearim came and took the ark of the Lord; they brought it to the house of Abinadab located on the hill. They consecrated Eleazar his son to guard the ark of the Lord.
1SA 7:2 It was quite a long time – some twenty years in all – that the ark stayed at Kiriath Jearim. All the people of Israel longed for the Lord.
1SA 7:3 Samuel said to all the people of Israel, “If you are really turning to the Lord with all your hearts, remove from among you the foreign gods and the images of Ashtoreth. Give your hearts to the Lord and serve only him. Then he will deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.”
1SA 7:4 So the Israelites removed the Baals and images of Ashtoreth. They served only the Lord.
1SA 7:5 Then Samuel said, “Gather all Israel to Mizpah, and I will pray to the Lord on your behalf.”
1SA 7:6 After they had assembled at Mizpah, they drew water and poured it out before the Lord. They fasted on that day, and they confessed there, “We have sinned against the Lord.” So Samuel led the people of Israel at Mizpah.
1SA 7:7 When the Philistines heard that the Israelites had gathered at Mizpah, the leaders of the Philistines went up against Israel. When the Israelites heard about this, they were afraid of the Philistines.
1SA 7:8 The Israelites said to Samuel, “Keep crying out to the Lord our God so that he may save us from the hand of the Philistines!”
1SA 7:9 So Samuel took a nursing lamb and offered it as a whole burnt offering to the Lord. Samuel cried out to the Lord on Israel’s behalf, and the Lord answered him.
1SA 7:10 As Samuel was offering burnt offerings, the Philistines approached to do battle with Israel. But on that day the Lord thundered loudly against the Philistines. He caused them to panic, and they were defeated by Israel.
1SA 7:11 Then the men of Israel left Mizpah and chased the Philistines, striking them down all the way to an area below Beth Car.
1SA 7:12 Samuel took a stone and placed it between Mizpah and Shen. He named it Ebenezer, saying, “Up to here the Lord has helped us.”
1SA 7:13 So the Philistines were defeated; they did not invade Israel again. The hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
1SA 7:14 The cities that the Philistines had captured from Israel were returned to Israel, from Ekron to Gath. Israel also delivered their territory from the control of the Philistines. There was also peace between Israel and the Amorites.
1SA 7:15 So Samuel led Israel all the days of his life.
1SA 7:16 Year after year he used to travel the circuit of Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah; he used to judge Israel in all of these places.
1SA 7:17 Then he would return to Ramah, because his home was there. He also judged Israel there and built an altar to the Lord there.
1SA 8:1 In his old age Samuel appointed his sons as judges over Israel.
1SA 8:2 The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second son was Abijah. They were judges in Beer Sheba.
1SA 8:3 But his sons did not follow his ways. Instead, they made money dishonestly, accepted bribes, and perverted justice.
1SA 8:4 So all the elders of Israel gathered together and approached Samuel at Ramah.
1SA 8:5 They said to him, “Look, you are old, and your sons don’t follow your ways. So now appoint over us a king to lead us, just like all the other nations have.”
1SA 8:6 But this request displeased Samuel, for they said, “Give us a king to lead us.” So Samuel prayed to the Lord.
1SA 8:7 The Lord said to Samuel, “Do everything the people request of you. For it is not you that they have rejected, but it is me that they have rejected as their king.
1SA 8:8 Just as they have done from the day that I brought them up from Egypt until this very day, they have rejected me and have served other gods. This is what they are also doing to you.
1SA 8:9 So now do as they say. But seriously warn them and make them aware of the policies of the king who will rule over them.”
1SA 8:10 So Samuel spoke all the words of the Lord to the people who were asking him for a king.
1SA 8:11 He said, “Here are the policies of the king who will rule over you: He will conscript your sons and put them in his chariot forces and in his cavalry; they will run in front of his chariot.
1SA 8:12 He will appoint for himself leaders of thousands and leaders of fifties, as well as those who plow his ground, reap his harvest, and make his weapons of war and his chariot equipment.
1SA 8:13 He will take your daughters to be ointment makers, cooks, and bakers.
1SA 8:14 He will take your best fields and vineyards and give them to his own servants.
1SA 8:15 He will demand a tenth of your seed and of the produce of your vineyards and give it to his administrators and his servants.
1SA 8:16 He will take your male and female servants, as well as your best cattle and your donkeys, and assign them for his own use.
1SA 8:17 He will demand a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will be his servants.
1SA 8:18 In that day you will cry out because of your king whom you have chosen for yourselves, but the Lord won’t answer you in that day.”
1SA 8:19 But the people refused to heed Samuel’s warning. Instead they said, “No! There will be a king over us!
1SA 8:20 We will be like all the other nations. Our king will judge us and lead us and fight our battles.”
1SA 8:21 So Samuel listened to everything the people said and then reported it to the Lord.
1SA 8:22 The Lord said to Samuel, “Do as they say and install a king over them.” Then Samuel said to the men of Israel, “Each of you go back to his own city.”
1SA 9:1 There was a Benjaminite man named Kish son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah of Benjamin. He was a prominent person.
1SA 9:2 He had a son named Saul, a handsome young man. There was no one among the Israelites more handsome than he was; he stood head and shoulders above all the people.
1SA 9:3 The donkeys of Saul’s father Kish wandered off, so Kish said to his son Saul, “Take one of the servants with you and go look for the donkeys.”
1SA 9:4 So Saul crossed through the hill country of Ephraim, passing through the land of Shalisha, but they did not find them. So they crossed through the land of Shaalim, but they were not there. Then he crossed through the land of Benjamin, and still they did not find them.
1SA 9:5 When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, “Come on, let’s head back before my father quits worrying about the donkeys and becomes anxious about us!”
1SA 9:6 But the servant said to him, “Look, there is a man of God in this town. He is highly respected. Everything that he says really happens. Now let’s go there. Perhaps he will tell us where we should go from here.”
1SA 9:7 So Saul said to his servant, “All right, we can go. But what can we bring the man, since the food in our bags is used up? We have no gift to take to the man of God. What do we have?”
1SA 9:8 The servant went on to answer Saul, “Look, I happen to have in my hand a quarter shekel of silver. I will give it to the man of God and he will tell us where we should go.”
1SA 9:9 (Now it used to be in Israel that whenever someone went to inquire of God he would say, “Come on, let’s go to the seer.” For today’s prophet used to be called a seer.)
1SA 9:10 So Saul said to his servant, “That’s a good idea! Come on. Let’s go.” So they went to the town where the man of God was.
1SA 9:11 As they were going up the ascent to the town, they met some girls coming out to draw water. They said to them, “Is this where the seer is?”
1SA 9:12 They replied, “Yes, straight ahead! But hurry now, for he came to the town today, and the people are making a sacrifice at the high place.
1SA 9:13 When you enter the town, you can find him before he goes up to the high place to eat. The people won’t eat until he arrives, for he must bless the sacrifice. Once that happens, those who have been invited will eat. Now go on up, for this is the time when you can find him!”
1SA 9:14 So they went up to the town. As they were heading for the middle of the town, Samuel was coming in their direction to go up to the high place.
1SA 9:15 Now the day before Saul arrived, the Lord had told Samuel:
1SA 9:16 “At this time tomorrow I will send to you a man from the land of Benjamin. You must consecrate him as a leader over my people Israel. He will save my people from the hand of the Philistines. For I have looked with favor on my people. Their cry has reached me!”
1SA 9:17 When Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said, “Here is the man that I told you about! He will rule over my people.”
1SA 9:18 As Saul approached Samuel in the middle of the gate, he said, “Please tell me where the seer’s house is.”
1SA 9:19 Samuel replied to Saul, “I am the seer! Go up in front of me to the high place! Today you will eat with me and in the morning I will send you away. I will tell you everything that you are thinking.
1SA 9:20 Don’t be concerned about the donkeys that you lost three days ago, for they have been found. Whom does all Israel desire? Is it not you, and all your father’s family?”
1SA 9:21 Saul replied, “Am I not a Benjaminite, from the smallest of Israel’s tribes, and is not my family clan the smallest of all the tribes of Benjamin? Why do you speak to me in this way?”
1SA 9:22 Then Samuel brought Saul and his servant into the room and gave them a place at the head of those who had been invited. There were about thirty people present.
1SA 9:23 Samuel said to the cook, “Give me the portion of meat that I gave to you – the one I asked you to keep with you.”
1SA 9:24 So the cook picked up the leg and brought it and set it in front of Saul. Samuel said, “What was kept is now set before you! Eat, for it has been kept for you for this meeting time, from the time I said, ‘I have invited the people.’” So Saul ate with Samuel that day.
1SA 9:25 When they came down from the high place to the town, Samuel spoke with Saul on the roof.
1SA 9:26 They got up at dawn and Samuel called to Saul on the roof, “Get up, so I can send you on your way.” So Saul got up and the two of them – he and Samuel – went outside.
1SA 9:27 While they were going down to the edge of town, Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to go on ahead of us.” So he did. Samuel then said, “You remain here awhile, so I can inform you of God’s message.”
1SA 10:1 Then Samuel took a small container of olive oil and poured it on Saul’s head. Samuel kissed him and said, “The Lord has chosen you to lead his people Israel! You will rule over the Lord’s people and you will deliver them from the power of the enemies who surround them. This will be your sign that the Lord has chosen you as leader over his inheritance.
1SA 10:2 When you leave me today, you will find two men near Rachel’s tomb at Zelzah on Benjamin’s border. They will say to you, ‘The donkeys you have gone looking for have been found. Your father is no longer concerned about the donkeys but has become anxious about you two! He is asking, “What should I do about my son?”’
1SA 10:3 “As you continue on from there, you will come to the tall tree of Tabor. At that point three men who are going up to God at Bethel will meet you. One of them will be carrying three young goats, one of them will be carrying three round loaves of bread, and one of them will be carrying a container of wine.
1SA 10:4 They will ask you how you’re doing and will give you two loaves of bread. You will accept them.
1SA 10:5 Afterward you will go to Gibeah of God, where there are Philistine officials. When you enter the town, you will meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place. They will have harps, tambourines, flutes, and lyres, and they will be prophesying.
1SA 10:6 Then the spirit of the Lord will rush upon you and you will prophesy with them. You will be changed into a different person.
1SA 10:7 “When these signs have taken place, do whatever your hand finds to do, for God will be with you.
1SA 10:8 You will go down to Gilgal before me. I am going to join you there to offer burnt offerings and to make peace offerings. You should wait for seven days, until I arrive and tell you what to do.”
1SA 10:9 As Saul turned to leave Samuel, God changed his inmost person. All these signs happened on that very day.
1SA 10:10 When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah, a company of prophets was coming out to meet him. Then the spirit of God rushed upon Saul and he prophesied among them.
1SA 10:11 When everyone who had known him previously saw him prophesying with the prophets, the people all asked one another, “What on earth has happened to the son of Kish? Does even Saul belong with the prophets?”
1SA 10:12 A man who was from there replied, “And who is their father?” Therefore this became a proverb: “Is even Saul among the prophets?”
1SA 10:13 When Saul had finished prophesying, he went to the high place.
1SA 10:14 Saul’s uncle asked him and his servant, “Where did you go?” Saul replied, “To look for the donkeys. But when we realized they were lost, we went to Samuel.”
1SA 10:15 Saul’s uncle said, “Tell me what Samuel said to you.”
1SA 10:16 Saul said to his uncle, “He assured us that the donkeys had been found.” But Saul did not tell him what Samuel had said about the matter of kingship.
1SA 10:17 Then Samuel called the people together before the Lord at Mizpah.
1SA 10:18 He said to the Israelites, “This is what the Lord God of Israel says, ‘I brought Israel up from Egypt and I delivered you from the power of the Egyptians and from the power of all the kingdoms that oppressed you.
1SA 10:19 But today you have rejected your God who saves you from all your trouble and distress. You have said, “No! Appoint a king over us.” Now take your positions before the Lord by your tribes and by your clans.’”
1SA 10:20 Then Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of Benjamin was chosen by lot.
1SA 10:21 Then he brought the tribe of Benjamin near by its families, and the family of Matri was chosen by lot. At last Saul son of Kish was chosen by lot. But when they looked for him, he was nowhere to be found.
1SA 10:22 So they inquired again of the Lord, “Has the man arrived here yet?” The Lord said, “He has hidden himself among the equipment.”
1SA 10:23 So they ran and brought him from there. When he took his position among the people, he stood head and shoulders above them all.
1SA 10:24 Then Samuel said to all the people, “Do you see the one whom the Lord has chosen? Indeed, there is no one like him among all the people!” All the people shouted out, “Long live the king!”
1SA 10:25 Then Samuel talked to the people about how the kingship would work. He wrote it all down on a scroll and set it before the Lord. Then Samuel sent all the people away to their homes.
1SA 10:26 Even Saul went to his home in Gibeah. With him went some brave men whose hearts God had touched.
1SA 10:27 But some wicked men said, “How can this man save us?” They despised him and did not even bring him a gift. But Saul said nothing about it.
1SA 11:1 Nahash the Ammonite marched against Jabesh Gilead. All the men of Jabesh Gilead said to Nahash, “Make a treaty with us and we will serve you.”
1SA 11:2 But Nahash the Ammonite said to them, “The only way I will make a treaty with you is if you let me gouge out the right eye of every one of you and in so doing humiliate all Israel!”
1SA 11:3 The elders of Jabesh said to him, “Leave us alone for seven days so that we can send messengers throughout the territory of Israel. If there is no one who can deliver us, we will come out voluntarily to you.”
1SA 11:4 When the messengers went to Gibeah (where Saul lived) and informed the people of these matters, all the people wept loudly.
1SA 11:5 Now Saul was walking behind the oxen as he came from the field. Saul asked, “What has happened to the people? Why are they weeping?” So they told him about the men of Jabesh.
1SA 11:6 The Spirit of God rushed upon Saul when he heard these words, and he became very angry.
1SA 11:7 He took a pair of oxen and cut them up. Then he sent the pieces throughout the territory of Israel by the hand of messengers, who said, “Whoever does not go out after Saul and after Samuel should expect this to be done to his oxen!” Then the terror of the Lord fell on the people, and they went out as one army.
1SA 11:8 When Saul counted them at Bezek, the Israelites were 300,000 strong and the men of Judah numbered 30,000.
1SA 11:9 They said to the messengers who had come, “Here’s what you should say to the men of Jabesh Gilead: ‘Tomorrow deliverance will come to you when the sun is fully up.’” When the messengers went and told the men of Jabesh Gilead, they were happy.
1SA 11:10 The men of Jabesh said, “Tomorrow we will come out to you and you can do with us whatever you wish.”
1SA 11:11 The next day Saul placed the people in three groups. They went to the Ammonite camp during the morning watch and struck them down until the hottest part of the day. The survivors scattered; no two of them remained together.
1SA 11:12 Then the people said to Samuel, “Who were the ones asking, ‘Will Saul reign over us?’ Hand over those men so we may execute them!”
1SA 11:13 But Saul said, “No one will be killed on this day. For today the Lord has given Israel a victory!”
1SA 11:14 Samuel said to the people, “Come on! Let’s go to Gilgal and renew the kingship there.”
1SA 11:15 So all the people went to Gilgal, where they established Saul as king in the Lord’s presence. They offered up peace offerings there in the Lord’s presence. Saul and all the Israelites were very happy.
1SA 12:1 Samuel said to all Israel, “I have done everything you requested. I have given you a king.
1SA 12:2 Now look! This king walks before you. As for me, I am old and gray, though my sons are here with you. I have walked before you from the time of my youth till the present day.
1SA 12:3 Here I am. Bring a charge against me before the Lord and before his chosen king. Whose ox have I taken? Whose donkey have I taken? Whom have I wronged? Whom have I oppressed? From whose hand have I taken a bribe so that I would overlook something? Tell me, and I will return it to you!”
1SA 12:4 They replied, “You have not wronged us or oppressed us. You have not taken anything from the hand of anyone.”
1SA 12:5 He said to them, “The Lord is witness against you, and his chosen king is witness this day, that you have not found any reason to accuse me.” They said, “He is witness!”
1SA 12:6 Samuel said to the people, “The Lord is the one who chose Moses and Aaron and who brought your ancestors up from the land of Egypt.
1SA 12:7 Now take your positions, so I may confront you before the Lord regarding all the Lord’s just actions toward you and your ancestors.
1SA 12:8 When Jacob entered Egypt, your ancestors cried out to the Lord. The Lord sent Moses and Aaron, and they led your ancestors out of Egypt and settled them in this place.
1SA 12:9 “But they forgot the Lord their God, so he gave them into the hand of Sisera, the general in command of Hazor’s army, and into the hand of the Philistines and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.
1SA 12:10 Then they cried out to the Lord and admitted, ‘We have sinned, for we have forsaken the Lord and have served the Baals and the images of Ashtoreth. Now deliver us from the hand of our enemies so that we may serve you.’
1SA 12:11 So the Lord sent Jerub-Baal, Barak, Jephthah, and Samuel, and he delivered you from the hand of the enemies all around you, and you were able to live securely.
1SA 12:12 “When you saw that King Nahash of the Ammonites was advancing against you, you said to me, ‘No! A king will rule over us’ – even though the Lord your God is your king!
1SA 12:13 Now look! Here is the king you have chosen – the one that you asked for! Look, the Lord has given you a king!
1SA 12:14 If you fear the Lord, serving him and obeying him and not rebelling against what he says, and if both you and the king who rules over you follow the Lord your God, all will be well.
1SA 12:15 But if you don’t obey the Lord and rebel against what the Lord says, the hand of the Lord will be against both you and your king.
1SA 12:16 “So now, take your positions and watch this great thing that the Lord is about to do in your sight.
1SA 12:17 Is this not the time of the wheat harvest? I will call on the Lord so that he makes it thunder and rain. Realize and see what a great sin you have committed before the Lord by asking for a king for yourselves.”
1SA 12:18 So Samuel called to the Lord, and the Lord made it thunder and rain that day. All the people were very afraid of both the Lord and Samuel.
1SA 12:19 All the people said to Samuel, “Pray to the Lord your God on behalf of us – your servants – so we won’t die, for we have added to all our sins by asking for a king.”
1SA 12:20 Then Samuel said to the people, “Don’t be afraid. You have indeed sinned. However, don’t turn aside from the Lord. Serve the Lord with all your heart.
1SA 12:21 You should not turn aside after empty things that can’t profit and can’t deliver, since they are empty.
1SA 12:22 The Lord will not abandon his people because he wants to uphold his great reputation. The Lord was pleased to make you his own people.
1SA 12:23 As far as I am concerned, far be it from me to sin against the Lord by ceasing to pray for you! I will instruct you in the way that is good and upright.
1SA 12:24 However, fear the Lord and serve him faithfully with all your heart. Just look at the great things he has done for you!
1SA 12:25 But if you continue to do evil, both you and your king will be swept away.”
1SA 13:1 Saul was [thirty] years old when he began to reign; he ruled over Israel for [forty] years.
1SA 13:2 Saul selected for himself three thousand men from Israel. Two thousand of these were with Saul at Micmash and in the hill country of Bethel; the remaining thousand were with Jonathan at Gibeah in the territory of Benjamin. He sent all the rest of the people back home.
1SA 13:3 Jonathan attacked the Philistine outpost that was at Geba and the Philistines heard about it. Then Saul alerted all the land saying, “Let the Hebrews pay attention!”
1SA 13:4 All Israel heard this message, “Saul has attacked the Philistine outpost, and now Israel is repulsive to the Philistines!” So the people were summoned to join Saul at Gilgal.
1SA 13:5 For the battle with Israel the Philistines had amassed 3,000 chariots, 6,000 horsemen, and an army as numerous as the sand on the seashore. They went up and camped at Micmash, east of Beth Aven.
1SA 13:6 The men of Israel realized they had a problem because their army was hard pressed. So the army hid in caves, thickets, cliffs, strongholds, and cisterns.
1SA 13:7 Some of the Hebrews crossed over the Jordan River to the land of Gad and Gilead. But Saul stayed at Gilgal; the entire army that was with him was terrified.
1SA 13:8 He waited for seven days, the time period indicated by Samuel. But Samuel did not come to Gilgal, and the army began to abandon Saul.
1SA 13:9 So Saul said, “Bring me the burnt offering and the peace offerings.” Then he offered a burnt offering.
1SA 13:10 Just when he had finished offering the burnt offering, Samuel appeared on the scene. Saul went out to meet him and to greet him.
1SA 13:11 But Samuel said, “What have you done?” Saul replied, “When I saw that the army had started to abandon me and that you didn’t come at the appointed time and that the Philistines had assembled at Micmash,
1SA 13:12 I thought, ‘Now the Philistines will come down on me at Gilgal and I have not sought the Lord’s favor.’ So I felt obligated to offer the burnt offering.”
1SA 13:13 Then Samuel said to Saul, “You have made a foolish choice! You have not obeyed the commandment that the Lord your God gave you. Had you done that, the Lord would have established your kingdom over Israel forever!
1SA 13:14 But now your kingdom will not continue! The Lord has sought out for himself a man who is loyal to him and the Lord has appointed him to be leader over his people, for you have not obeyed what the Lord commanded you.”
1SA 13:15 Then Samuel set out and went up from Gilgal to Gibeah in the territory of Benjamin. Saul mustered the army that remained with him; there were about six hundred men.
1SA 13:16 Saul, his son Jonathan, and the army that remained with them stayed in Gibeah in the territory of Benjamin, while the Philistines camped in Micmash.
1SA 13:17 Raiding bands went out from the camp of the Philistines in three groups. One band turned toward the road leading to Ophrah by the land of Shual;
1SA 13:18 another band turned toward the road leading to Beth Horon; and yet another band turned toward the road leading to the border that overlooks the valley of Zeboim in the direction of the desert.
1SA 13:19 A blacksmith could not be found in all the land of Israel, for the Philistines had said, “This will prevent the Hebrews from making swords and spears.”
1SA 13:20 So all Israel had to go down to the Philistines in order to get their plowshares, cutting instruments, axes, and sickles sharpened.
1SA 13:21 They charged two-thirds of a shekel to sharpen plowshares and cutting instruments, and a third of a shekel to sharpen picks and axes, and to set ox goads.
1SA 13:22 So on the day of the battle no sword or spear was to be found in the hand of anyone in the army that was with Saul and Jonathan. No one but Saul and his son Jonathan had them.
1SA 13:23 A garrison of the Philistines had gone out to the pass at Micmash.
1SA 14:1 Then one day Jonathan son of Saul said to his armor bearer, “Come on, let’s go over to the Philistine garrison that is opposite us.” But he did not let his father know.
1SA 14:2 Now Saul was sitting under a pomegranate tree in Migron, on the outskirts of Gibeah. The army that was with him numbered about six hundred men.
1SA 14:3 Now Ahijah was carrying an ephod. He was the son of Ahitub, who was the brother of Ichabod and a son of Phineas, son of Eli, the priest of the Lord in Shiloh. The army was unaware that Jonathan had left.
1SA 14:4 Now there was a steep cliff on each side of the pass through which Jonathan intended to go to reach the Philistine garrison. One cliff was named Bozez, the other Seneh.
1SA 14:5 The cliff to the north was closer to Micmash, the one to the south closer to Geba.
1SA 14:6 Jonathan said to his armor bearer, “Come on, let’s go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised men. Perhaps the Lord will intervene for us. Nothing can prevent the Lord from delivering, whether by many or by a few.”
1SA 14:7 His armor bearer said to him, “Do everything that is on your mind. Do as you’re inclined. I’m with you all the way!”
1SA 14:8 Jonathan replied, “All right! We’ll go over to these men and fight them.
1SA 14:9 If they say to us, ‘Stay put until we approach you,’ we will stay right there and not go up to them.
1SA 14:10 But if they say, ‘Come up against us,’ we will go up. For in that case the Lord has given them into our hand – it will be a sign to us.”
1SA 14:11 When they made themselves known to the Philistine garrison, the Philistines said, “Look! The Hebrews are coming out of the holes in which they hid themselves.”
1SA 14:12 Then the men of the garrison said to Jonathan and his armor bearer, “Come on up to us so we can teach you a thing or two!” Then Jonathan said to his armor bearer, “Come up behind me, for the Lord has given them into the hand of Israel!”
1SA 14:13 Jonathan crawled up on his hands and feet, with his armor bearer following behind him. Jonathan struck down the Philistines, while his armor bearer came along behind him and killed them.
1SA 14:14 In this initial skirmish Jonathan and his armor bearer struck down about twenty men in an area that measured half an acre.
1SA 14:15 Then fear overwhelmed those who were in the camp, those who were in the field, all the army in the garrison, and the raiding bands. They trembled and the ground shook. This fear was caused by God.
1SA 14:16 Saul’s watchmen at Gibeah in the territory of Benjamin looked on as the crowd of soldiers seemed to melt away first in one direction and then in another.
1SA 14:17 So Saul said to the army that was with him, “Muster the troops and see who is no longer with us.” When they mustered the troops, Jonathan and his armor bearer were not there.
1SA 14:18 So Saul said to Ahijah, “Bring near the ephod,” for he was at that time wearing the ephod.
1SA 14:19 While Saul spoke to the priest, the panic in the Philistines’ camp was becoming greater and greater. So Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand!”
1SA 14:20 Saul and all the army that was with him assembled and marched into battle, where they found the Philistines in total panic killing one another with their swords.
1SA 14:21 The Hebrews who had earlier gone over to the Philistine side joined the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan.
1SA 14:22 When all the Israelites who had hidden themselves in the hill country of Ephraim heard that the Philistines had fled, they too pursued them in battle.
1SA 14:23 So the Lord delivered Israel that day, and the battle shifted over to Beth Aven.
1SA 14:24 Now the men of Israel were hard pressed that day, for Saul had made the army agree to this oath: “Cursed be the man who eats food before evening! I will get my vengeance on my enemies!” So no one in the army ate anything.
1SA 14:25 Now the whole army entered the forest and there was honey on the ground.
1SA 14:26 When the army entered the forest, they saw the honey flowing, but no one ate any of it, for the army was afraid of the oath.
1SA 14:27 But Jonathan had not heard about the oath his father had made the army take. He extended the end of his staff that was in his hand and dipped it in the honeycomb. When he ate it, his eyes gleamed.
1SA 14:28 Then someone from the army informed him, “Your father put the army under a strict oath saying, ‘Cursed be the man who eats food today!’ That is why the army is tired.”
1SA 14:29 Then Jonathan said, “My father has caused trouble for the land. See how my eyes gleamed when I tasted just a little of this honey.
1SA 14:30 Certainly if the army had eaten some of the enemies’ provisions that they came across today, would not the slaughter of the Philistines have been even greater?”
1SA 14:31 On that day the army struck down the Philistines from Micmash to Aijalon, and they became very tired.
1SA 14:32 So the army rushed greedily on the plunder, confiscating sheep, cattle, and calves. They slaughtered them right on the ground, and the army ate them blood and all.
1SA 14:33 Now it was reported to Saul, “Look, the army is sinning against the Lord by eating even the blood.” He said, “All of you have broken the covenant! Roll a large stone over here to me.”
1SA 14:34 Then Saul said, “Scatter out among the army and say to them, ‘Each of you bring to me your ox and sheep and slaughter them in this spot and eat. But don’t sin against the Lord by eating the blood.” So that night each one brought his ox and slaughtered it there.
1SA 14:35 Then Saul built an altar for the Lord; it was the first time he had built an altar for the Lord.
1SA 14:36 Saul said, “Let’s go down after the Philistines at night; we will rout them until the break of day. We won’t leave any of them alive!” They replied, “Do whatever seems best to you.” But the priest said, “Let’s approach God here.”
1SA 14:37 So Saul asked God, “Should I go down after the Philistines? Will you deliver them into the hand of Israel?” But he did not answer him that day.
1SA 14:38 Then Saul said, “All you leaders of the army come here. Find out how this sin occurred today.
1SA 14:39 For as surely as the Lord, the deliverer of Israel, lives, even if it turns out to be my own son Jonathan, he will certainly die!” But no one from the army said anything.
1SA 14:40 Then he said to all Israel, “You will be on one side, and I and my son Jonathan will be on the other side.” The army replied to Saul, “Do whatever you think is best.”
1SA 14:41 Then Saul said, “O Lord God of Israel! If this sin has been committed by me or by my son Jonathan, then, O Lord God of Israel, respond with Urim. But if this sin has been committed by your people Israel, respond with Thummim.” Then Jonathan and Saul were indicated by lot, while the army was exonerated.
1SA 14:42 Then Saul said, “Cast the lot between me and my son Jonathan!” Jonathan was indicated by lot.
1SA 14:43 So Saul said to Jonathan, “Tell me what you have done.” Jonathan told him, “I used the end of the staff that was in my hand to taste a little honey. I must die!”
1SA 14:44 Saul said, “God will punish me severely if Jonathan doesn’t die!”
1SA 14:45 But the army said to Saul, “Should Jonathan, who won this great victory in Israel, die? May it never be! As surely as the Lord lives, not a single hair of his head will fall to the ground! For it is with the help of God that he has acted today.” So the army rescued Jonathan from death.
1SA 14:46 Then Saul stopped chasing the Philistines, and the Philistines went back home.
1SA 14:47 After Saul had secured his royal position over Israel, he fought against all their enemies on all sides – the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, the kings of Zobah, and the Philistines. In every direction that he turned he was victorious.
1SA 14:48 He fought bravely, striking down the Amalekites and delivering Israel from the hand of its enemies.
1SA 14:49 The sons of Saul were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malki-Shua. He had two daughters; the older one was named Merab and the younger Michal.
1SA 14:50 The name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz. The name of the general in command of his army was Abner son of Ner, Saul’s uncle.
1SA 14:51 Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.
1SA 14:52 There was fierce war with the Philistines all the days of Saul. So whenever Saul saw anyone who was a warrior or a brave individual, he would conscript him.
1SA 15:1 Then Samuel said to Saul, “I was the one the Lord sent to anoint you as king over his people Israel. Now listen to what the Lord says.
1SA 15:2 Here is what the Lord of hosts says: ‘I carefully observed how the Amalekites opposed Israel along the way when Israel came up from Egypt.
1SA 15:3 So go now and strike down the Amalekites. Destroy everything that they have. Don’t spare them. Put them to death – man, woman, child, infant, ox, sheep, camel, and donkey alike.’”
1SA 15:4 So Saul assembled the army and mustered them at Telaim. There were 200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah.
1SA 15:5 Saul proceeded to the city of Amalek, where he set an ambush in the wadi.
1SA 15:6 Saul said to the Kenites, “Go on and leave! Go down from among the Amalekites! Otherwise I will sweep you away with them! After all, you were kind to all the Israelites when they came up from Egypt.” So the Kenites withdrew from among the Amalekites.
1SA 15:7 Then Saul struck down the Amalekites all the way from Havilah to Shur, which is next to Egypt.
1SA 15:8 He captured King Agag of the Amalekites alive, but he executed all Agag’s people with the sword.
1SA 15:9 However, Saul and the army spared Agag, along with the best of the flock, the cattle, the fatlings, and the lambs, as well as everything else that was of value. They were not willing to slaughter them. But they did slaughter everything that was despised and worthless.
1SA 15:10 Then the word of the Lord came to Samuel:
1SA 15:11 “I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned away from me and has not done what I told him to do.” Samuel became angry and he cried out to the Lord all that night.
1SA 15:12 Then Samuel got up early to meet Saul the next morning. But Samuel was informed, “Saul has gone to Carmel where he is setting up a monument for himself. Then Samuel left and went down to Gilgal.”
1SA 15:13 When Samuel came to him, Saul said to him, “May the Lord bless you! I have done what the Lord said.”
1SA 15:14 Samuel replied, “If that is the case, then what is this sound of sheep in my ears and the sound of cattle that I hear?”
1SA 15:15 Saul said, “They were brought from the Amalekites; the army spared the best of the flocks and cattle to sacrifice to the Lord our God. But everything else we slaughtered.”
1SA 15:16 Then Samuel said to Saul, “Wait a minute! Let me tell you what the Lord said to me last night.” Saul said to him, “Tell me.”
1SA 15:17 Samuel said, “Is it not true that when you were insignificant in your own eyes, you became head of the tribes of Israel? The Lord chose you as king over Israel.
1SA 15:18 The Lord sent you on a campaign saying, ‘Go and exterminate those sinful Amalekites! Fight against them until you have destroyed them.’
1SA 15:19 Why haven’t you obeyed the Lord? Instead you have greedily rushed upon the plunder! You have done what is wrong in the Lord’s estimation.”
1SA 15:20 Then Saul said to Samuel, “But I have obeyed the Lord! I went on the campaign the Lord sent me on. I brought back King Agag of the Amalekites after exterminating the Amalekites.
1SA 15:21 But the army took from the plunder some of the sheep and cattle – the best of what was to be slaughtered – to sacrifice to the Lord your God in Gilgal.”
1SA 15:22 Then Samuel said, “Does the Lord take pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices as much as he does in obedience? Certainly, obedience is better than sacrifice; paying attention is better than the fat of rams.
1SA 15:23 For rebellion is like the sin of divination, and presumption is like the evil of idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of the Lord, he has rejected you as king.”
1SA 15:24 Then Saul said to Samuel, “I have sinned, for I have disobeyed what the Lord commanded and what you said as well. For I was afraid of the army, and I followed their wishes.
1SA 15:25 Now please forgive my sin! Go back with me so I can worship the Lord.”
1SA 15:26 Samuel said to Saul, “I will not go back with you, for you have rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected you from being king over Israel!”
1SA 15:27 When Samuel turned to leave, Saul grabbed the edge of his robe and it tore.
1SA 15:28 Samuel said to him, “The Lord has torn the kingdom of Israel from you this day and has given it to one of your colleagues who is better than you!
1SA 15:29 The Preeminent One of Israel does not go back on his word or change his mind, for he is not a human being who changes his mind.”
1SA 15:30 Saul again replied, “I have sinned. But please honor me before the elders of my people and before Israel. Go back with me so I may worship the Lord your God.”
1SA 15:31 So Samuel followed Saul back, and Saul worshiped the Lord.
1SA 15:32 Then Samuel said, “Bring me King Agag of the Amalekites.” So Agag came to him trembling, thinking to himself, “Surely death is bitter!”
1SA 15:33 Samuel said, “Just as your sword left women childless, so your mother will be the most bereaved among women!” Then Samuel hacked Agag to pieces there in Gilgal before the Lord.
1SA 15:34 Then Samuel went to Ramah, while Saul went up to his home in Gibeah of Saul.
1SA 15:35 Until the day he died Samuel did not see Saul again. Samuel did, however, mourn for Saul, but the Lord regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel.
1SA 16:1 The Lord said to Samuel, “How long do you intend to mourn for Saul? I have rejected him as king over Israel. Fill your horn with olive oil and go! I am sending you to Jesse in Bethlehem, for I have selected a king for myself from among his sons.”
1SA 16:2 Samuel replied, “How can I go? Saul will hear about it and kill me!” But the Lord said, “Take a heifer with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to the Lord.’
1SA 16:3 Then invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show you what you should do. You will anoint for me the one I point out to you.”
1SA 16:4 Samuel did what the Lord told him. When he arrived in Bethlehem, the elders of the city were afraid to meet him. They said, “Do you come in peace?”
1SA 16:5 He replied, “Yes, in peace. I have come to sacrifice to the Lord. Consecrate yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice.” So he consecrated Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice.
1SA 16:6 When they arrived, Samuel noticed Eliab and said to himself, “Surely, here before the Lord stands his chosen king!”
1SA 16:7 But the Lord said to Samuel, “Don’t be impressed by his appearance or his height, for I have rejected him. God does not view things the way men do. People look on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks at the heart.”
1SA 16:8 Then Jesse called Abinadab and presented him to Samuel. But Samuel said, “The Lord has not chosen this one, either.”
1SA 16:9 Then Jesse presented Shammah. But Samuel said, “The Lord has not chosen this one either.”
1SA 16:10 Jesse presented seven of his sons to Samuel. But Samuel said to Jesse, “The Lord has not chosen any of these.”
1SA 16:11 Then Samuel said to Jesse, “Is that all of the young men?” Jesse replied, “There is still the youngest one, but he’s taking care of the flock.” Samuel said to Jesse, “Send and get him, for we cannot turn our attention to other things until he comes here.”
1SA 16:12 So Jesse had him brought in. Now he was ruddy, with attractive eyes and a handsome appearance. The Lord said, “Go and anoint him. This is the one!”
1SA 16:13 So Samuel took the horn full of olive oil and anointed him in the presence of his brothers. The Spirit of the Lord rushed upon David from that day onward. Then Samuel got up and went to Ramah.
1SA 16:14 Now the Spirit of the Lord had turned away from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord tormented him.
1SA 16:15 Then Saul’s servants said to him, “Look, an evil spirit from God is tormenting you!”
1SA 16:16 Let our lord instruct his servants who are here before you to look for a man who knows how to play the lyre. Then whenever the evil spirit from God comes upon you, he can play the lyre and you will feel better.”
1SA 16:17 So Saul said to his servants, “Find me a man who plays well and bring him to me.”
1SA 16:18 One of his attendants replied, “I have seen a son of Jesse in Bethlehem who knows how to play the lyre. He is a brave warrior and is articulate and handsome, for the Lord is with him.”
1SA 16:19 So Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, “Send me your son David, who is out with the sheep.
1SA 16:20 So Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread, a container of wine, and a young goat and sent them to Saul with his son David.
1SA 16:21 David came to Saul and stood before him. Saul liked him a great deal, and he became his armor bearer.
1SA 16:22 Then Saul sent word to Jesse saying, “Let David be my servant, for I really like him.”
1SA 16:23 So whenever the spirit from God would come upon Saul, David would take his lyre and play it. This would bring relief to Saul and make him feel better. Then the evil spirit would leave him alone.
1SA 17:1 The Philistines gathered their troops for battle. They assembled at Socoh in Judah. They camped in Ephes Dammim, between Socoh and Azekah.
1SA 17:2 Saul and the Israelite army assembled and camped in the valley of Elah, where they arranged their battle lines to fight against the Philistines.
1SA 17:3 The Philistines were standing on one hill, and the Israelites on another hill, with the valley between them.
1SA 17:4 Then a champion came out from the camp of the Philistines. His name was Goliath; he was from Gath. He was close to seven feet tall.
1SA 17:5 He had a bronze helmet on his head and was wearing scale body armor. The weight of his bronze body armor was five thousand shekels.
1SA 17:6 He had bronze shin guards on his legs, and a bronze javelin was slung over his shoulders.
1SA 17:7 The shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s beam, and the iron point of his spear weighed six hundred shekels. His shield bearer was walking before him.
1SA 17:8 Goliath stood and called to Israel’s troops, “Why do you come out to prepare for battle? Am I not the Philistine, and are you not the servants of Saul? Choose for yourselves a man so he may come down to me!
1SA 17:9 If he is able to fight with me and strike me down, we will become your servants. But if I prevail against him and strike him down, you will become our servants and will serve us.”
1SA 17:10 Then the Philistine said, “I defy Israel’s troops this day! Give me a man so we can fight each other!”
1SA 17:11 When Saul and all the Israelites heard these words of the Philistine, they were upset and very afraid.
1SA 17:12 Now David was the son of this Ephrathite named Jesse from Bethlehem in Judah. He had eight sons, and in Saul’s days he was old and well advanced in years.
1SA 17:13 Jesse’s three oldest sons had followed Saul to war. The names of the three sons who went to war were Eliab, his firstborn, Abinadab, the second oldest, and Shammah, the third oldest.
1SA 17:14 Now David was the youngest. While the three oldest sons followed Saul,
1SA 17:15 David was going back and forth from Saul in order to care for his father’s sheep in Bethlehem.
1SA 17:16 Meanwhile for forty days the Philistine approached every morning and evening and took his position.
1SA 17:17 Jesse said to his son David, “Take your brothers this ephah of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread; go quickly to the camp to your brothers.
1SA 17:18 Also take these ten portions of cheese to their commanding officer. Find out how your brothers are doing and bring back their pledge that they received the goods.
1SA 17:19 They are with Saul and the whole Israelite army in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.”
1SA 17:20 So David got up early in the morning and entrusted the flock to someone else who would watch over it. After loading up, he went just as Jesse had instructed him. He arrived at the camp as the army was going out to the battle lines shouting its battle cry.
1SA 17:21 Israel and the Philistines drew up their battle lines opposite one another.
1SA 17:22 After David had entrusted his cargo to the care of the supply officer, he ran to the battlefront. When he arrived, he asked his brothers how they were doing.
1SA 17:23 As he was speaking with them, the champion named Goliath, the Philistine from Gath, was coming up from the battle lines of the Philistines. He spoke the way he usually did, and David heard it.
1SA 17:24 When all the men of Israel saw this man, they retreated from his presence and were very afraid.
1SA 17:25 The men of Israel said, “Have you seen this man who is coming up? He does so to defy Israel. But the king will make the man who can strike him down very wealthy! He will give him his daughter in marriage, and he will make his father’s house exempt from tax obligations in Israel.”
1SA 17:26 David asked the men who were standing near him, “What will be done for the man who strikes down this Philistine and frees Israel from this humiliation? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he defies the armies of the living God?”
1SA 17:27 The soldiers told him what had been promised, saying, “This is what will be done for the man who can strike him down.”
1SA 17:28 When David’s oldest brother Eliab heard him speaking to the men, he became angry with David and said, “Why have you come down here? To whom did you entrust those few sheep in the desert? I am familiar with your pride and deceit! You have come down here to watch the battle!”
1SA 17:29 David replied, “What have I done now? Can’t I say anything?”
1SA 17:30 Then he turned from those who were nearby to someone else and asked the same question, but they gave him the same answer as before.
1SA 17:31 When David’s words were overheard and reported to Saul, he called for him.
1SA 17:32 David said to Saul, “Don’t let anyone be discouraged. Your servant will go and fight this Philistine!”
1SA 17:33 But Saul replied to David, “You aren’t able to go against this Philistine and fight him! You’re just a boy! He has been a warrior from his youth!”
1SA 17:34 David replied to Saul, “Your servant has been a shepherd for his father’s flock. Whenever a lion or bear would come and carry off a sheep from the flock,
1SA 17:35 I would go out after it, strike it down, and rescue the sheep from its mouth. If it rose up against me, I would grab it by its jaw, strike it, and kill it.
1SA 17:36 Your servant has struck down both the lion and the bear. This uncircumcised Philistine will be just like one of them. For he has defied the armies of the living God!”
1SA 17:37 David went on to say, “The Lord who delivered me from the lion and the bear will also deliver me from the hand of this Philistine!” Then Saul said to David, “Go! The Lord will be with you.”
1SA 17:38 Then Saul clothed David with his own fighting attire and put a bronze helmet on his head. He also put body armor on him.
1SA 17:39 David strapped on his sword over his fighting attire and tried to walk around, but he was not used to them. David said to Saul, “I can’t walk in these things, for I’m not used to them.” So David removed them.
1SA 17:40 He took his staff in his hand, picked out five smooth stones from the stream, placed them in the pouch of his shepherd’s bag, took his sling in hand, and approached the Philistine.
1SA 17:41 The Philistine kept coming closer to David, with his shield bearer walking in front of him.
1SA 17:42 When the Philistine looked carefully at David, he despised him, for he was only a ruddy and handsome boy.
1SA 17:43 The Philistine said to David, “Am I a dog, that you are coming after me with sticks?” Then the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
1SA 17:44 The Philistine said to David, “Come here to me, so I can give your flesh to the birds of the sky and the wild animals of the field!”
1SA 17:45 But David replied to the Philistine, “You are coming against me with sword and spear and javelin. But I am coming against you in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel’s armies, whom you have defied!
1SA 17:46 This very day the Lord will deliver you into my hand! I will strike you down and cut off your head. This day I will give the corpses of the Philistine army to the birds of the sky and the wild animals of the land. Then all the land will realize that Israel has a God
1SA 17:47 and all this assembly will know that it is not by sword or spear that the Lord saves! For the battle is the Lord’s, and he will deliver you into our hand.”
1SA 17:48 The Philistine drew steadily closer to David to attack him, while David quickly ran toward the battle line to attack the Philistine.
1SA 17:49 David reached his hand into the bag and took out a stone. He slung it, striking the Philistine on the forehead. The stone sank deeply into his forehead, and he fell down with his face to the ground.
1SA 17:50 David prevailed over the Philistine with just the sling and the stone. He struck down the Philistine and killed him. David did not even have a sword in his hand.
1SA 17:51 David ran and stood over the Philistine. He grabbed Goliath’s sword, drew it from its sheath, killed him, and cut off his head with it. When the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they ran away.
1SA 17:52 Then the men of Israel and Judah charged forward, shouting a battle cry. They chased the Philistines to the valley and to the very gates of Ekron. The Philistine corpses lay fallen along the Shaaraim road to Gath and Ekron.
1SA 17:53 When the Israelites returned from their hot pursuit of the Philistines, they looted their camp.
1SA 17:54 David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to Jerusalem, and he put Goliath’s weapons in his tent.
1SA 17:55 Now as Saul watched David going out to fight the Philistine, he asked Abner, the general in command of the army, “Whose son is this young man, Abner?” Abner replied, “As surely as you live, O king, I don’t know.”
1SA 17:56 The king said, “Find out whose son this boy is!”
1SA 17:57 So when David returned from striking down the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before Saul. He still had the head of the Philistine in his hand.
1SA 17:58 Saul said to him, “Whose son are you, young man?” David replied, “I am the son of your servant Jesse in Bethlehem.”
1SA 18:1 When David had finished talking with Saul, Jonathan and David became bound together in close friendship. Jonathan loved David as much as he did his own life.
1SA 18:2 Saul retained David on that day and did not allow him to return to his father’s house.
1SA 18:3 Jonathan made a covenant with David, for he loved him as much as he did his own life.
1SA 18:4 Jonathan took off the robe he was wearing and gave it to David, along with the rest of his gear, including his sword, his bow, and even his belt.
1SA 18:5 On every mission on which Saul sent him, David achieved success. So Saul appointed him over the men of war. This pleased not only all the army, but also Saul’s servants.
1SA 18:6 When the men arrived after David returned from striking down the Philistine, the women from all the cities of Israel came out singing and dancing to meet King Saul. They were happy as they played their tambourines and three-stringed instruments.
1SA 18:7 The women who were playing the music sang, “Saul has struck down his thousands, but David his tens of thousands!”
1SA 18:8 This made Saul very angry. The statement displeased him and he thought, “They have attributed to David tens of thousands, but to me they have attributed only thousands. What does he lack, except the kingdom?”
1SA 18:9 So Saul was keeping an eye on David from that day onward.
1SA 18:10 The next day an evil spirit from God rushed upon Saul and he prophesied within his house. Now David was playing the lyre that day. There was a spear in Saul’s hand,
1SA 18:11 and Saul threw the spear, thinking, “I’ll nail David to the wall!” But David escaped from him on two different occasions.
1SA 18:12 So Saul feared David, because the Lord was with him but had departed from Saul.
1SA 18:13 Saul removed David from his presence and made him a commanding officer. David led the army out to battle and back.
1SA 18:14 Now David achieved success in all he did, for the Lord was with him.
1SA 18:15 When Saul saw how very successful he was, he was afraid of him.
1SA 18:16 But all Israel and Judah loved David, for he was the one leading them out to battle and back.
1SA 18:17 Then Saul said to David, “Here’s my oldest daughter, Merab. I want to give her to you in marriage. Only be a brave warrior for me and fight the battles of the Lord.” For Saul thought, “There’s no need for me to raise my hand against him. Let it be the hand of the Philistines!”
1SA 18:18 David said to Saul, “Who am I? Who are my relatives or the clan of my father in Israel that I should become the king’s son-in-law?”
1SA 18:19 When the time came for Merab, Saul’s daughter, to be given to David, she instead was given in marriage to Adriel, who was from Meholah.
1SA 18:20 Now Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved David. When they told Saul about this, it pleased him.
1SA 18:21 Saul said, “I will give her to him so that she may become a snare to him and the hand of the Philistines may be against him.” So Saul said to David, “Today is the second time for you to become my son-in-law.”
1SA 18:22 Then Saul instructed his servants, “Tell David secretly, ‘The king is pleased with you, and all his servants like you. So now become the king’s son-in-law.”
1SA 18:23 So Saul’s servants spoke these words privately to David. David replied, “Is becoming the king’s son-in-law something insignificant to you? I’m just a poor and lightly-esteemed man!”
1SA 18:24 When Saul’s servants reported what David had said,
1SA 18:25 Saul replied, “Here is what you should say to David: ‘There is nothing that the king wants as a price for the bride except a hundred Philistine foreskins, so that he can be avenged of his enemies.’” (Now Saul was thinking that he could kill David by the hand of the Philistines.)
1SA 18:26 So his servants told David these things and David agreed to become the king’s son-in-law. Now the specified time had not yet expired
1SA 18:27 when David, along with his men, went out and struck down two hundred Philistine men. David brought their foreskins and presented all of them to the king so he could become the king’s son-in-law. Saul then gave him his daughter Michal in marriage.
1SA 18:28 When Saul realized that the Lord was with David and that his daughter Michal loved David,
1SA 18:29 Saul became even more afraid of him. Saul continued to be at odds with David from then on.
1SA 18:30 Then the leaders of the Philistines would march out, and as often as they did so, David achieved more success than all of Saul’s servants. His name was held in high esteem.
1SA 19:1 Then Saul told his son Jonathan and all his servants to kill David. But Saul’s son Jonathan liked David very much.
1SA 19:2 So Jonathan told David, “My father Saul is trying to kill you. So be careful tomorrow morning. Find a hiding place and stay in seclusion.
1SA 19:3 I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where you are. I will speak about you to my father. When I find out what the problem is, I will let you know.”
1SA 19:4 So Jonathan spoke on David’s behalf to his father Saul. He said to him, “The king should not sin against his servant David, for he has not sinned against you. On the contrary, his actions have been very beneficial for you.
1SA 19:5 He risked his life when he struck down the Philistine and the Lord gave all Israel a great victory. When you saw it, you were happy. So why would you sin against innocent blood by putting David to death for no reason?”
1SA 19:6 Saul accepted Jonathan’s advice and took an oath, “As surely as the Lord lives, he will not be put to death.”
1SA 19:7 Then Jonathan called David and told him all these things. Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he served him as he had done formerly.
1SA 19:8 Now once again there was war. So David went out to fight the Philistines. He defeated them thoroughly and they ran away from him.
1SA 19:9 Then an evil spirit from the Lord came upon Saul. He was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand, while David was playing the lyre.
1SA 19:10 Saul tried to nail David to the wall with the spear, but he escaped from Saul’s presence and the spear drove into the wall. David escaped quickly that night.
1SA 19:11 Saul sent messengers to David’s house to guard it and to kill him in the morning. Then David’s wife Michal told him, “If you do not save yourself tonight, tomorrow you will be dead!”
1SA 19:12 So Michal lowered David through the window, and he ran away and escaped.
1SA 19:13 Then Michal took a household idol and put it on the bed. She put a quilt made of goat’s hair over its head and then covered the idol with a garment.
1SA 19:14 When Saul sent messengers to arrest David, she said, “He’s sick.”
1SA 19:15 Then Saul sent the messengers back to see David, saying, “Bring him up to me on his bed so I can kill him.”
1SA 19:16 When the messengers came, they found only the idol on the bed and the quilt made of goat’s hair at its head.
1SA 19:17 Saul said to Michal, “Why have you deceived me this way by sending my enemy away? Now he has escaped!” Michal replied to Saul, “He said to me, ‘Help me get away or else I will kill you!’”
1SA 19:18 Now David had run away and escaped. He went to Samuel in Ramah and told him everything that Saul had done to him. Then he and Samuel went and stayed at Naioth.
1SA 19:19 It was reported to Saul saying, “David is at Naioth in Ramah.”
1SA 19:20 So Saul sent messengers to capture David. When they saw a company of prophets prophesying with Samuel standing there as their leader, the spirit of God came upon Saul’s messengers, and they also prophesied.
1SA 19:21 When it was reported to Saul, he sent more messengers, but they prophesied too. So Saul sent messengers a third time, but they also prophesied.
1SA 19:22 Finally Saul himself went to Ramah. When he arrived at the large cistern that is in Secu, he asked, “Where are Samuel and David?” They said, “At Naioth in Ramah.”
1SA 19:23 So Saul went to Naioth in Ramah. The Spirit of God came upon him as well, and he walked along prophesying until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
1SA 19:24 He even stripped off his clothes and prophesied before Samuel. He lay there naked all that day and night. (For that reason it is asked, “Is Saul also among the prophets?”)
1SA 20:1 David fled from Naioth in Ramah. He came to Jonathan and asked, “What have I done? What is my offense? How have I sinned before your father? For he is seeking my life!”
1SA 20:2 Jonathan said to him, “By no means are you going to die! My father does nothing large or small without making me aware of it. Why would my father hide this matter from me? It just won’t happen!”
1SA 20:3 Taking an oath, David again said, “Your father is very much aware of the fact that I have found favor with you, and he has thought, ‘Don’t let Jonathan know about this, or he will be upset.’ But as surely as the Lord lives and you live, there is about one step between me and death!”
1SA 20:4 Jonathan replied to David, “Tell me what I can do for you.”
1SA 20:5 David said to Jonathan, “Tomorrow is the new moon, and I am certainly expected to join the king for a meal. You must send me away so I can hide in the field until the third evening from now.
1SA 20:6 If your father happens to miss me, you should say, ‘David urgently requested me to let him go to his city Bethlehem, for there is an annual sacrifice there for his entire family.’
1SA 20:7 If he should then say, ‘That’s fine,’ then your servant is safe. But if he becomes very angry, be assured that he has decided to harm me.
1SA 20:8 You must be loyal to your servant, for you have made a covenant with your servant in the Lord’s name. If I am guilty, you yourself kill me! Why bother taking me to your father?”
1SA 20:9 Jonathan said, “Far be it from you to suggest this! If I were at all aware that my father had decided to harm you, wouldn’t I tell you about it?”
1SA 20:10 David said to Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you harshly?”
1SA 20:11 Jonathan said to David, “Come on. Let’s go out to the field.” When the two of them had gone out into the field,
1SA 20:12 Jonathan said to David, “The Lord God of Israel is my witness. I will feel out my father about this time the day after tomorrow. If he is favorably inclined toward David, will I not then send word to you and let you know?
1SA 20:13 But if my father intends to do you harm, may the Lord do all this and more to Jonathan, if I don’t let you know and send word to you so you can go safely on your way. May the Lord be with you, as he was with my father.
1SA 20:14 While I am still alive, extend to me the loyalty of the Lord, or else I will die!
1SA 20:15 Don’t ever cut off your loyalty to my family, not even when the Lord has cut off every one of David’s enemies from the face of the earth
1SA 20:16 and called David’s enemies to account.” So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David.
1SA 20:17 Jonathan once again took an oath with David, because he loved him. In fact Jonathan loved him as much as he did his own life.
1SA 20:18 Jonathan said to him, “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, for your seat will be empty.
1SA 20:19 On the third day you should go down quickly and come to the place where you hid yourself the day this all started. Stay near the stone Ezel.
1SA 20:20 I will shoot three arrows near it, as though I were shooting at a target.
1SA 20:21 When I send a boy after them, I will say, “Go and find the arrows.” If I say to the boy, ‘Look, the arrows are on this side of you; get them,’ then come back. For as surely as the Lord lives, you will be safe and there will no problem.
1SA 20:22 But if I say to the boy, “Look, the arrows are on the other side of you,’ get away. For in that case the Lord has sent you away.
1SA 20:23 With regard to the matter that you and I discussed, the Lord is the witness between us forever!”
1SA 20:24 So David hid in the field. When the new moon came, the king sat down to eat his meal.
1SA 20:25 The king sat down in his usual place by the wall, with Jonathan opposite him and Abner at his side. But David’s place was vacant.
1SA 20:26 However, Saul said nothing about it that day, for he thought, “Something has happened to make him ceremonially unclean. Yes, he must be unclean.”
1SA 20:27 But the next morning, the second day of the new moon, David’s place was still vacant. So Saul said to his son Jonathan, “Why has Jesse’s son not come to the meal yesterday or today?”
1SA 20:28 Jonathan replied to Saul, “David urgently requested that he be allowed to go to Bethlehem.
1SA 20:29 He said, ‘Permit me to go, for we are having a family sacrifice in the city, and my brother urged me to be there. So now, if I have found favor with you, let me go to see my brothers.’ For that reason he has not come to the king’s table.”
1SA 20:30 Saul became angry with Jonathan and said to him, “You stupid traitor! Don’t I realize that to your own disgrace and to the disgrace of your mother’s nakedness you have chosen this son of Jesse?
1SA 20:31 For as long as this son of Jesse is alive on the earth, you and your kingdom will not be established. Now, send some men and bring him to me. For he is as good as dead!”
1SA 20:32 Jonathan responded to his father Saul, “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?”
1SA 20:33 Then Saul threw his spear at Jonathan in order to strike him down. So Jonathan was convinced that his father had decided to kill David.
1SA 20:34 Jonathan got up from the table enraged. He did not eat any food on that second day of the new moon, for he was upset that his father had humiliated David.
1SA 20:35 The next morning Jonathan, along with a young servant, went out to the field to meet David.
1SA 20:36 He said to his servant, “Run, find the arrows that I am about to shoot.” As the servant ran, Jonathan shot the arrow beyond him.
1SA 20:37 When the servant came to the place where Jonathan had shot the arrow, Jonathan called out to the servant, “Isn’t the arrow further beyond you?”
1SA 20:38 Jonathan called out to the servant, “Hurry! Go faster! Don’t delay!” Jonathan’s servant retrieved the arrow and came back to his master.
1SA 20:39 (Now the servant did not understand any of this. Only Jonathan and David knew what was going on.)
1SA 20:40 Then Jonathan gave his equipment to the servant who was with him. He said to him, “Go, take these things back to the city.”
1SA 20:41 When the servant had left, David got up from beside the mound, knelt with his face to the ground, and bowed three times. Then they kissed each other and they both wept, especially David.
1SA 20:42 Jonathan said to David, “Go in peace, for the two of us have sworn together in the name of the Lord saying, ‘The Lord will be between me and you and between my descendants and your descendants forever.’” Then David got up and left, while Jonathan went back to the city.
1SA 21:1 David went to Ahimelech the priest in Nob. Ahimelech was shaking with fear when he met David, and said to him, “Why are you by yourself with no one accompanying you?”
1SA 21:2 David replied to Ahimelech the priest, “The king instructed me to do something, but he said to me, ‘Don’t let anyone know the reason I am sending you or the instructions I have given you.’ I have told my soldiers to wait at a certain place.
1SA 21:3 Now what do you have at your disposal? Give me five loaves of bread, or whatever can be found.”
1SA 21:4 The priest replied to David, “I don’t have any ordinary bread at my disposal. Only holy bread is available, and then only if your soldiers have abstained from sexual relations with women.”
1SA 21:5 David said to the priest, “Certainly women have been kept away from us, just as on previous occasions when I have set out. The soldiers’ equipment is holy, even on an ordinary journey. How much more so will they be holy today, along with their equipment!”
1SA 21:6 So the priest gave him holy bread, for there was no bread there other than the bread of the Presence. It had been removed from before the Lord in order to replace it with hot bread on the day it had been taken away.
1SA 21:7 (One of Saul’s servants was there that day, detained before the Lord. His name was Doeg the Edomite, who was in charge of Saul’s shepherds.)
1SA 21:8 David said to Ahimelech, “Is there no sword or spear here at your disposal? I don’t have my own sword or equipment in hand due to the urgency of the king’s instructions.”
1SA 21:9 The priest replied, “The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you struck down in the valley of Elah, is wrapped in a garment behind the ephod. If you wish, take it for yourself. Other than that, there’s nothing here.” David said, “There’s nothing like it! Give it to me!”
1SA 21:10 So on that day David arose and fled from Saul. He went to King Achish of Gath.
1SA 21:11 The servants of Achish said to him, “Isn’t this David, the king of the land? Isn’t he the one that they sing about when they dance, saying, ‘Saul struck down his thousands, But David his tens of thousands’?”
1SA 21:12 David thought about what they said and was very afraid of King Achish of Gath.
1SA 21:13 He altered his behavior in their presence. Since he was in their power, he pretended to be insane, making marks on the doors of the gate and letting his saliva run down his beard.
1SA 21:14 Achish said to his servants, “Look at this madman! Why did you bring him to me?
1SA 21:15 Do I have a shortage of fools, that you have brought me this man to display his insanity in front of me? Should this man enter my house?”
1SA 22:1 So David left there and escaped to the cave of Adullam. When his brothers and the rest of his father’s family learned about it, they went down there to him.
1SA 22:2 All those who were in trouble or owed someone money or were discontented gathered around him, and he became their leader. He had about four hundred men with him.
1SA 22:3 Then David went from there to Mizpah in Moab, where he said to the king of Moab, “Please let my father and mother stay with you until I know what God is going to do for me.”
1SA 22:4 So he had them stay with the king of Moab; they stayed with him the whole time that David was in the stronghold.
1SA 22:5 Then Gad the prophet said to David, “Don’t stay in the stronghold. Go to the land of Judah.” So David left and went to the forest of Hereth.
1SA 22:6 But Saul found out the whereabouts of David and the men who were with him. Now Saul was sitting at Gibeah under the tamarisk tree at an elevated location with his spear in hand and all his servants stationed around him.
1SA 22:7 Saul said to his servants who were stationed around him, “Listen up, you Benjaminites! Is Jesse’s son giving fields and vineyards to all of you? Or is he making all of you commanders and officers?
1SA 22:8 For all of you have conspired against me! No one informs me when my own son makes an agreement with this son of Jesse! Not one of you feels sorry for me or informs me that my own son has commissioned my own servant to hide in ambush against me, as is the case today!”
1SA 22:9 But Doeg the Edomite, who had stationed himself with the servants of Saul, replied, “I saw this son of Jesse come to Ahimelech son of Ahitub at Nob.
1SA 22:10 He inquired of the Lord for him and gave him provisions. He also gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.”
1SA 22:11 Then the king arranged for a meeting with the priest Ahimelech son of Ahitub and all the priests of his father’s house who were at Nob. They all came to the king.
1SA 22:12 Then Saul said, “Listen, son of Ahitub.” He replied, “Here I am, my lord.”
1SA 22:13 Saul said to him, “Why have you conspired against me, you and this son of Jesse? You gave him bread and a sword and inquired of God on his behalf, so that he opposes me and waits in ambush, as is the case today!”
1SA 22:14 Ahimelech replied to the king, “Who among all your servants is faithful like David? He is the king’s son-in-law, the leader of your bodyguard, and honored in your house!
1SA 22:15 Was it just today that I began to inquire of God on his behalf? Far be it from me! The king should not accuse his servant or any of my father’s house. For your servant is not aware of all this – not in whole or in part!”
1SA 22:16 But the king said, “You will surely die, Ahimelech, you and all your father’s house!
1SA 22:17 Then the king said to the messengers who were stationed beside him, “Turn and kill the priests of the Lord, for they too have sided with David! They knew he was fleeing, but they did not inform me.” But the king’s servants refused to harm the priests of the Lord.
1SA 22:18 Then the king said to Doeg, “You turn and strike down the priests!” So Doeg the Edomite turned and struck down the priests. He killed on that day eighty-five men who wore the linen ephod.
1SA 22:19 As for Nob, the city of the priests, he struck down with the sword men and women, children and infants, oxen, donkeys, and sheep – all with the sword.
1SA 22:20 But one of the sons of Ahimelech son of Ahitub escaped and fled to David. His name was Abiathar.
1SA 22:21 Abiathar told David that Saul had killed the priests of the Lord.
1SA 22:22 Then David said to Abiathar, “I knew that day when Doeg the Edomite was there that he would certainly tell Saul! I am guilty of all the deaths in your father’s house!
1SA 22:23 Stay with me. Don’t be afraid! Whoever seeks my life is seeking your life as well. You are secure with me.”
1SA 23:1 They told David, “The Philistines are fighting in Keilah and are looting the threshing floors.”
1SA 23:2 So David asked the Lord, “Should I go and strike down these Philistines?” The Lord said to David, “Go, strike down the Philistines and deliver Keilah.”
1SA 23:3 But David’s men said to him, “We are afraid while we are still here in Judah! What will it be like if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?”
1SA 23:4 So David asked the Lord once again. But again the Lord replied, “Arise, go down to Keilah, for I will give the Philistines into your hand.”
1SA 23:5 So David and his men went to Keilah and fought the Philistines. He took away their cattle and thoroughly defeated them. David delivered the inhabitants of Keilah.
1SA 23:6 Now when Abiathar son of Ahimelech had fled to David at Keilah, he had brought with him an ephod.
1SA 23:7 When Saul was told that David had come to Keilah, Saul said, “God has delivered him into my hand, for he has boxed himself into a corner by entering a city with two barred gates.”
1SA 23:8 So Saul mustered all his army to go down to Keilah and besiege David and his men.
1SA 23:9 When David realized that Saul was planning to harm him, he told Abiathar the priest, “Bring the ephod!”
1SA 23:10 Then David said, “O Lord God of Israel, your servant has clearly heard that Saul is planning to come to Keilah to destroy the city because of me.
1SA 23:11 Will the leaders of Keilah deliver me into his hand? Will Saul come down as your servant has heard? O Lord God of Israel, please inform your servant!” Then the Lord said, “He will come down.”
1SA 23:12 David asked, “Will the leaders of Keilah deliver me and my men into Saul’s hand?” The Lord said, “They will deliver you over.”
1SA 23:13 So David and his men, who numbered about six hundred, set out and left Keilah; they moved around from one place to another. When told that David had escaped from Keilah, Saul called a halt to his expedition.
1SA 23:14 David stayed in the strongholds that were in the desert and in the hill country of the desert of Ziph. Saul looked for him all the time, but God did not deliver David into his hand.
1SA 23:15 David realized that Saul had come out to seek his life; at that time David was in Horesh in the desert of Ziph.
1SA 23:16 Then Jonathan son of Saul left and went to David at Horesh. He encouraged him through God.
1SA 23:17 He said to him, “Don’t be afraid! For the hand of my father Saul cannot find you. You will rule over Israel, and I will be your second in command. Even my father Saul realizes this.”
1SA 23:18 When the two of them had made a covenant before the Lord, David stayed on at Horesh, but Jonathan went to his house.
1SA 23:19 Then the Ziphites went up to Saul at Gibeah and said, “Isn’t David hiding among us in the strongholds at Horesh on the hill of Hakilah, south of Jeshimon?
1SA 23:20 Now at your own discretion, O king, come down. Delivering him into the king’s hand will be our responsibility.”
1SA 23:21 Saul replied, “May you be blessed by the Lord, for you have had compassion on me.
1SA 23:22 Go and make further arrangements. Determine precisely where he is and who has seen him there, for I am told that he is extremely cunning.
1SA 23:23 Locate precisely all the places where he hides and return to me with dependable information. Then I will go with you. If he is in the land, I will find him among all the thousands of Judah.”
1SA 23:24 So they left and went to Ziph ahead of Saul. Now David and his men were in the desert of Maon, in the Arabah to the south of Jeshimon.
1SA 23:25 Saul and his men went to look for him. But David was informed and went down to the rock and stayed in the desert of Maon. When Saul heard about it, he pursued David in the desert of Maon.
1SA 23:26 Saul went on one side of the mountain, while David and his men went on the other side of the mountain. David was hurrying to get away from Saul, but Saul and his men were surrounding David and his men so they could capture them.
1SA 23:27 But a messenger came to Saul saying, “Come quickly, for the Philistines have raided the land!”
1SA 23:28 So Saul stopped pursuing David and went to confront the Philistines. Therefore that place is called Sela Hammahlekoth.
1SA 23:29 Then David went up from there and stayed in the strongholds of En Gedi.
1SA 24:1 When Saul returned from pursuing the Philistines, they told him, “Look, David is in the desert of En Gedi.”
1SA 24:2 So Saul took three thousand select men from all Israel and went to find David and his men in the region of the rocks of the mountain goats.
1SA 24:3 He came to the sheepfolds by the road, where there was a cave. Saul went into it to relieve himself. Now David and his men were sitting in the recesses of the cave.
1SA 24:4 David’s men said to him, “This is the day about which the Lord said to you, ‘I will give your enemy into your hand, and you can do to him whatever seems appropriate to you.’” So David got up and quietly cut off an edge of Saul’s robe.
1SA 24:5 Afterward David’s conscience bothered him because he had cut off an edge of Saul’s robe.
1SA 24:6 He said to his men, “May the Lord keep me far away from doing such a thing to my lord, who is the Lord’s chosen one, by extending my hand against him. After all, he is the Lord’s chosen one.”
1SA 24:7 David restrained his men with these words and did not allow them to rise up against Saul. Then Saul left the cave and started down the road.
1SA 24:8 Afterward David got up and went out of the cave. He called out after Saul, “My lord, O king!” When Saul looked behind him, David kneeled down and bowed with his face to the ground.
1SA 24:9 David said to Saul, “Why do you pay attention when men say, ‘David is seeking to do you harm’?
1SA 24:10 Today your own eyes see how the Lord delivered you – this very day – into my hands in the cave. Some told me to kill you, but I had pity on you and said, ‘I will not extend my hand against my lord, for he is the Lord’s chosen one.’
1SA 24:11 Look, my father, and see the edge of your robe in my hand! When I cut off the edge of your robe, I didn’t kill you. So realize and understand that I am not planning evil or rebellion. Even though I have not sinned against you, you are waiting in ambush to take my life.
1SA 24:12 May the Lord judge between the two of us, and may the Lord vindicate me over you, but my hand will not be against you.
1SA 24:13 It’s like the old proverb says: ‘From evil people evil proceeds.’ But my hand will not be against you.
1SA 24:14 Who has the king of Israel come out after? Who is it that you are pursuing? A dead dog? A single flea?
1SA 24:15 May the Lord be our judge and arbiter. May he see and arbitrate my case and deliver me from your hands!”
1SA 24:16 When David finished speaking these words to Saul, Saul said, “Is that your voice, my son David?” Then Saul wept loudly.
1SA 24:17 He said to David, “You are more innocent than I, for you have treated me well, even though I have tried to harm you!
1SA 24:18 You have explained today how you have treated me well. The Lord delivered me into your hand, but you did not kill me.
1SA 24:19 Now if a man finds his enemy, does he send him on his way in good shape? May the Lord repay you with good this day for what you have done to me.
1SA 24:20 Now look, I realize that you will in fact be king and that the kingdom of Israel will be established in your hand.
1SA 24:21 So now swear to me in the Lord’s name that you will not kill my descendants after me or destroy my name from the house of my father.”
1SA 24:22 David promised Saul this on oath. Then Saul went to his house, and David and his men went up to the stronghold.
1SA 25:1 Samuel died, and all Israel assembled and mourned him. They buried him at his home in Ramah. Then David left and went down to the desert of Paran.
1SA 25:2 There was a man in Maon whose business was in Carmel. This man was very wealthy; he owned three thousand sheep and a thousand goats. At that time he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
1SA 25:3 The man’s name was Nabal, and his wife’s name was Abigail. She was both wise and beautiful, but the man was harsh and his deeds were evil. He was a Calebite.
1SA 25:4 When David heard in the desert that Nabal was shearing his sheep,
1SA 25:5 he sent ten servants, saying to them, “Go up to Carmel to see Nabal and give him greetings in my name.
1SA 25:6 Then you will say to my brother, “Peace to you and your house! Peace to all that is yours!
1SA 25:7 Now I hear that they are shearing sheep for you. When your shepherds were with us, we neither insulted them nor harmed them the whole time they were in Carmel.
1SA 25:8 Ask your own servants; they can tell you! May my servants find favor in your sight, for we have come at the time of a holiday. Please provide us – your servants and your son David – with whatever you can spare.”
1SA 25:9 So David’s servants went and spoke all these words to Nabal in David’s name. Then they paused.
1SA 25:10 But Nabal responded to David’s servants, “Who is David, and who is this son of Jesse? This is a time when many servants are breaking away from their masters!
1SA 25:11 Should I take my bread and my water and my meat that I have slaughtered for my shearers and give them to these men? I don’t even know where they came from!”
1SA 25:12 So David’s servants went on their way. When they had returned, they came and told David all these things.
1SA 25:13 Then David instructed his men, “Each of you strap on your sword!” So each one strapped on his sword, and David also strapped on his sword. About four hundred men followed David up, while two hundred stayed behind with the equipment.
1SA 25:14 But one of the servants told Nabal’s wife Abigail, “David sent messengers from the desert to greet our lord, but he screamed at them.
1SA 25:15 These men were very good to us. They did not insult us, nor did we sustain any loss during the entire time we were together in the field.
1SA 25:16 Both night and day they were a protective wall for us the entire time we were with them, while we were tending our flocks.
1SA 25:17 Now be aware of this, and see what you can do. For disaster has been planned for our lord and his entire household. He is such a wicked person that no one tells him anything!”
1SA 25:18 So Abigail quickly took two hundred loaves of bread, two containers of wine, five prepared sheep, five seahs of roasted grain, a hundred bunches of raisins, and two hundred lumps of pressed figs. She loaded them on donkeys
1SA 25:19 and said to her servants, “Go on ahead of me. I will come after you.” But she did not tell her husband Nabal.
1SA 25:20 Riding on her donkey, she went down under cover of the mountain. David and his men were coming down to meet her, and she encountered them.
1SA 25:21 Now David had been thinking, “In vain I guarded everything that belonged to this man in the desert. I didn’t take anything from him. But he has repaid my good with evil.
1SA 25:22 God will severely punish David, if I leave alive until morning even one male from all those who belong to him!”
1SA 25:23 When Abigail saw David, she got down quickly from the donkey, threw herself down before David, and bowed to the ground.
1SA 25:24 Falling at his feet, she said, “My lord, I accept all the guilt! But please let your female servant speak with my lord! Please listen to the words of your servant!
1SA 25:25 My lord should not pay attention to this wicked man Nabal. He simply lives up to his name! His name means ‘fool,’ and he is indeed foolish! But I, your servant, did not see the servants my lord sent.
1SA 25:26 “Now, my lord, as surely as the Lord lives and as surely as you live, it is the Lord who has kept you from shedding blood and taking matters into your own hands. Now may your enemies and those who seek to harm my lord be like Nabal.
1SA 25:27 Now let this present that your servant has brought to my lord be given to the servants who follow my lord.
1SA 25:28 Please forgive the sin of your servant, for the Lord will certainly establish the house of my lord, because my lord fights the battles of the Lord. May no evil be found in you all your days!
1SA 25:29 When someone sets out to chase you and to take your life, the life of my lord will be wrapped securely in the bag of the living by the Lord your God. But he will sling away the lives of your enemies from the sling’s pocket!
1SA 25:30 The Lord will do for my lord everything that he promised you, and he will make you a leader over Israel.
1SA 25:31 Your conscience will not be overwhelmed with guilt for having poured out innocent blood and for having taken matters into your own hands. When the Lord has granted my lord success, please remember your servant.”
1SA 25:32 Then David said to Abigail, “Praised be the Lord, the God of Israel, who has sent you this day to meet me!
1SA 25:33 Praised be your good judgment! May you yourself be rewarded for having prevented me this day from shedding blood and taking matters into my own hands!
1SA 25:34 Otherwise, as surely as the Lord, the God of Israel, lives – he who has prevented me from harming you – if you had not come so quickly to meet me, by morning’s light not even one male belonging to Nabal would have remained alive!”
1SA 25:35 Then David took from her hand what she had brought to him. He said to her, “Go back to your home in peace. Be assured that I have listened to you and responded favorably.”
1SA 25:36 When Abigail went back to Nabal, he was holding a banquet in his house like that of the king. Nabal was having a good time and was very intoxicated. She told him absolutely nothing until morning’s light.
1SA 25:37 In the morning, when Nabal was sober, his wife told him about these matters. He had a stroke and was paralyzed.
1SA 25:38 After about ten days the Lord struck Nabal down and he died.
1SA 25:39 When David heard that Nabal had died, he said, “Praised be the Lord who has vindicated me and avenged the insult that I suffered from Nabal! The Lord has kept his servant from doing evil, and he has repaid Nabal for his evil deeds.” Then David sent word to Abigail and asked her to become his wife.
1SA 25:40 So the servants of David went to Abigail at Carmel and said to her, “David has sent us to you to bring you back to be his wife.”
1SA 25:41 She arose, bowed her face toward the ground, and said, “Your female servant, like a lowly servant, will wash the feet of the servants of my lord.”
1SA 25:42 Then Abigail quickly went and mounted her donkey, with five of her female servants accompanying her. She followed David’s messengers and became his wife.
1SA 25:43 David had also married Ahinoam from Jezreel; the two of them became his wives.
1SA 25:44 (Now Saul had given his daughter Michal, David’s wife, to Paltiel son of Laish, who was from Gallim.)
1SA 26:1 The Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah and said, “Isn’t David hiding on the hill of Hakilah near Jeshimon?”
1SA 26:2 So Saul arose and went down to the desert of Ziph, accompanied by three thousand select men of Israel, to look for David in the desert of Ziph.
1SA 26:3 Saul camped by the road on the hill of Hakilah near Jeshimon, but David was staying in the desert. When he realized that Saul had come to the desert to find him,
1SA 26:4 David sent scouts and verified that Saul had indeed arrived.
1SA 26:5 So David set out and went to the place where Saul was camped. David saw the place where Saul and Abner son of Ner, the general in command of his army, were sleeping. Now Saul was lying in the entrenchment, and the army was camped all around him.
1SA 26:6 David said to Ahimelech the Hittite and Abishai son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, “Who will go down with me to Saul in the camp?” Abishai replied, “I will go down with you.”
1SA 26:7 So David and Abishai approached the army at night and found Saul lying asleep in the entrenchment with his spear stuck in the ground by his head. Abner and the army were lying all around him.
1SA 26:8 Abishai said to David, “Today God has delivered your enemy into your hands. Now let me drive the spear right through him into the ground with one swift jab! A second jab won’t be necessary!”
1SA 26:9 But David said to Abishai, “Don’t kill him! Who can extend his hand against the Lord’s chosen one and remain guiltless?”
1SA 26:10 David went on to say, “As the Lord lives, the Lord himself will strike him down. Either his day will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and be swept away.
1SA 26:11 But may the Lord prevent me from extending my hand against the Lord’s chosen one! Now take the spear by Saul’s head and the jug of water, and let’s get out of here!”
1SA 26:12 So David took the spear and the jug of water by Saul’s head, and they got out of there. No one saw them or was aware of their presence or woke up. All of them were asleep, for the Lord had caused a deep sleep to fall on them.
1SA 26:13 Then David crossed to the other side and stood on the top of the hill some distance away; there was a considerable distance between them.
1SA 26:14 David called to the army and to Abner son of Ner, “Won’t you answer, Abner?” Abner replied, “Who are you, that you have called to the king?”
1SA 26:15 David said to Abner, “Aren’t you a man? After all, who is like you in Israel? Why then haven’t you protected your lord the king? One of the soldiers came to kill your lord the king.
1SA 26:16 This failure on your part isn’t good! As surely as the Lord lives, you people who have not protected your lord, the Lord’s chosen one, are as good as dead! Now look where the king’s spear and the jug of water that was by his head are!”
1SA 26:17 When Saul recognized David’s voice, he said, “Is that your voice, my son David?” David replied, “Yes, it’s my voice, my lord the king.”
1SA 26:18 He went on to say, “Why is my lord chasing his servant? What have I done? What wrong have I done?
1SA 26:19 So let my lord the king now listen to the words of his servant. If the Lord has incited you against me, may he take delight in an offering. But if men have instigated this, may they be cursed before the Lord! For they have driven me away this day from being united with the Lord’s inheritance, saying, ‘Go on, serve other gods!’
1SA 26:20 Now don’t let my blood fall to the ground away from the Lord’s presence, for the king of Israel has gone out to look for a flea the way one looks for a partridge in the hill country.”
1SA 26:21 Saul replied, “I have sinned. Come back, my son David. I won’t harm you, for you treated my life with value this day. I have behaved foolishly and have made a very terrible mistake!”
1SA 26:22 David replied, “Here is the king’s spear! Let one of your servants cross over and get it.
1SA 26:23 The Lord rewards each man for his integrity and loyalty. Even though today the Lord delivered you into my hand, I was not willing to extend my hand against the Lord’s chosen one.
1SA 26:24 In the same way that I valued your life this day, may the Lord value my life and deliver me from all danger.”
1SA 26:25 Saul replied to David, “May you be rewarded, my son David! You will without question be successful!” So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
1SA 27:1 David thought to himself, “One of these days I’m going to be swept away by the hand of Saul! There is nothing better for me than to escape to the land of the Philistines. Then Saul will despair of searching for me through all the territory of Israel and I will escape from his hand.”
1SA 27:2 So David left and crossed over to King Achish son of Maoch of Gath accompanied by his six hundred men.
1SA 27:3 David settled with Achish in Gath, along with his men and their families. David had with him his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelite and Abigail the Carmelite, Nabal’s widow.
1SA 27:4 When Saul learned that David had fled to Gath, he did not mount a new search for him.
1SA 27:5 David said to Achish, “If I have found favor with you, let me be given a place in one of the country towns so that I can live there. Why should your servant settle in the royal city with you?”
1SA 27:6 So Achish gave him Ziklag on that day. (For that reason Ziklag has belonged to the kings of Judah until this very day.)
1SA 27:7 The length of time that David lived in the Philistine countryside was a year and four months.
1SA 27:8 Then David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites. (They had been living in that land for a long time, from the approach to Shur as far as the land of Egypt.)
1SA 27:9 When David would attack a district, he would leave neither man nor woman alive. He would take sheep, cattle, donkeys, camels, and clothing and would then go back to Achish.
1SA 27:10 When Achish would ask, “Where did you raid today?” David would say, “The Negev of Judah” or “The Negev of Jeharmeel” or “The Negev of the Kenites.”
1SA 27:11 Neither man nor woman would David leave alive so as to bring them back to Gath. He was thinking, “This way they can’t tell on us, saying, ‘This is what David did.’” Such was his practice the entire time that he lived in the country of the Philistines.
1SA 27:12 So Achish trusted David, thinking to himself, “He is really hated among his own people in Israel! From now on he will be my servant.”
1SA 28:1 In those days the Philistines gathered their troops for war in order to fight Israel. Achish said to David, “You should fully understand that you and your men must go with me into the battle.”
1SA 28:2 David replied to Achish, “That being the case, you will come to know what your servant can do!” Achish said to David, “Then I will make you my bodyguard from now on.”
1SA 28:3 Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had lamented over him and had buried him in Ramah, his hometown. In the meantime Saul had removed the mediums and magicians from the land.
1SA 28:4 The Philistines assembled; they came and camped at Shunem. Saul mustered all Israel and camped at Gilboa.
1SA 28:5 When Saul saw the camp of the Philistines, he was absolutely terrified.
1SA 28:6 So Saul inquired of the Lord, but the Lord did not answer him – not by dreams nor by Urim nor by the prophets.
1SA 28:7 So Saul instructed his servants, “Find me a woman who is a medium, so that I may go to her and inquire of her.” His servants replied to him, “There is a woman who is a medium in Endor.”
1SA 28:8 So Saul disguised himself and put on other clothing and left, accompanied by two of his men. They came to the woman at night and said, “Use your ritual pit to conjure up for me the one I tell you.”
1SA 28:9 But the woman said to him, “Look, you are aware of what Saul has done; he has removed the mediums and magicians from the land! Why are you trapping me so you can put me to death?”
1SA 28:10 But Saul swore an oath to her by the Lord, “As surely as the Lord lives, you will not incur guilt in this matter!”
1SA 28:11 The woman replied, “Who is it that I should bring up for you?” He said, “Bring up for me Samuel.”
1SA 28:12 When the woman saw Samuel, she cried out loudly. The woman said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? You are Saul!”
1SA 28:13 The king said to her, “Don’t be afraid! What have you seen?” The woman replied to Saul, “I have seen one like a god coming up from the ground!”
1SA 28:14 He said to her, “What about his appearance?” She said, “An old man is coming up! He is wrapped in a robe!” Then Saul realized it was Samuel, and he bowed his face toward the ground and kneeled down.
1SA 28:15 Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?” Saul replied, “I am terribly troubled! The Philistines are fighting against me and God has turned away from me. He does not answer me – not by the prophets nor by dreams. So I have called on you to tell me what I should do.”
1SA 28:16 Samuel said, “Why are you asking me, now that the Lord has turned away from you and has become your enemy?
1SA 28:17 The Lord has done exactly as I prophesied! The Lord has torn the kingdom from your hand and has given it to your neighbor David!
1SA 28:18 Since you did not obey the Lord and did not carry out his fierce anger against the Amalekites, the Lord has done this thing to you today.
1SA 28:19 The Lord will hand you and Israel over to the Philistines! Tomorrow both you and your sons will be with me. The Lord will also hand the army of Israel over to the Philistines!”
1SA 28:20 Saul quickly fell full length on the ground and was very afraid because of Samuel’s words. He was completely drained of energy, not having eaten anything all that day and night.
1SA 28:21 When the woman came to Saul and saw how terrified he was, she said to him, “Your servant has done what you asked. I took my life into my own hands and did what you told me.
1SA 28:22 Now it’s your turn to listen to your servant! Let me set before you a bit of bread so that you can eat. When you regain your strength, you can go on your way.”
1SA 28:23 But he refused, saying, “I won’t eat!” Both his servants and the woman urged him to eat, so he gave in. He got up from the ground and sat down on the bed.
1SA 28:24 Now the woman had a well-fed calf at her home that she quickly slaughtered. Taking some flour, she kneaded bread and baked it without leaven.
1SA 28:25 She brought it to Saul and his servants, and they ate. Then they arose and left that same night.
1SA 29:1 The Philistines assembled all their troops at Aphek, while Israel camped at the spring that is in Jezreel.
1SA 29:2 When the leaders of the Philistines were passing in review at the head of their units of hundreds and thousands, David and his men were passing in review in the rear with Achish.
1SA 29:3 The leaders of the Philistines asked, “What about these Hebrews?” Achish said to the leaders of the Philistines, “Isn’t this David, the servant of King Saul of Israel, who has been with me for quite some time? I have found no fault with him from the day of his defection until the present time!”
1SA 29:4 But the leaders of the Philistines became angry with him and said to him, “Send the man back! Let him return to the place that you assigned him! Don’t let him go down with us into the battle, for he might become our adversary in the battle. What better way to please his lord than with the heads of these men?
1SA 29:5 Isn’t this David, of whom they sang as they danced, ‘Saul has struck down his thousands, but David his tens of thousands’?”
1SA 29:6 So Achish summoned David and said to him, “As surely as the Lord lives, you are an honest man, and I am glad to have you serving with me in the army. I have found no fault with you from the day that you first came to me until the present time. But in the opinion of the leaders, you are not reliable.
1SA 29:7 So turn and leave in peace. You must not do anything that the leaders of the Philistines consider improper!”
1SA 29:8 But David said to Achish, “What have I done? What have you found in your servant from the day that I first came into your presence until the present time, that I shouldn’t go and fight the enemies of my lord the king?”
1SA 29:9 Achish replied to David, “I am convinced that you are as reliable as the angel of God! However, the leaders of the Philistines have said, ‘He must not go up with us in the battle.’
1SA 29:10 So get up early in the morning along with the servants of your lord who have come with you. When you get up early in the morning, as soon as it is light enough to see, leave.”
1SA 29:11 So David and his men got up early in the morning to return to the land of the Philistines, but the Philistines went up to Jezreel.
1SA 30:1 On the third day David and his men came to Ziklag. Now the Amalekites had raided the Negev and Ziklag. They attacked Ziklag and burned it.
1SA 30:2 They took captive the women who were in it, from the youngest to the oldest, but they did not kill anyone. They simply carried them off and went on their way.
1SA 30:3 When David and his men came to the city, they found it burned. Their wives, sons, and daughters had been taken captive.
1SA 30:4 Then David and the men who were with him wept loudly until they could weep no more.
1SA 30:5 David’s two wives had been taken captive – Ahinoam the Jezreelite and Abigail the Carmelite, Nabal’s widow.
1SA 30:6 David was very upset, for the men were thinking of stoning him; each man grieved bitterly over his sons and daughters. But David drew strength from the Lord his God.
1SA 30:7 Then David said to the priest Abiathar son of Ahimelech, “Bring me the ephod.” So Abiathar brought the ephod to David.
1SA 30:8 David inquired of the Lord, saying, “Should I pursue this raiding band? Will I overtake them?” He said to him, “Pursue, for you will certainly overtake them and carry out a rescue!”
1SA 30:9 So David went, accompanied by his six hundred men. When he came to the Wadi Besor, those who were in the rear stayed there.
1SA 30:10 David and four hundred men continued the pursuit, but two hundred men who were too exhausted to cross the Wadi Besor stayed there.
1SA 30:11 Then they found an Egyptian in the field and brought him to David. They gave him bread to eat and water to drink.
1SA 30:12 They gave him a slice of pressed figs and two bunches of raisins to eat. This greatly refreshed him, for he had not eaten food or drunk water for three days and three nights.
1SA 30:13 David said to him, “To whom do you belong, and where are you from?” The young man said, “I am an Egyptian, the servant of an Amalekite man. My master abandoned me when I was ill for three days.
1SA 30:14 We conducted a raid on the Negev of the Kerethites, on the area of Judah, and on the Negev of Caleb. We burned Ziklag.”
1SA 30:15 David said to him, “Can you take us down to this raiding party?” He said, “Swear to me by God that you will not kill me or hand me over to my master, and I will take you down to this raiding party.”
1SA 30:16 So he took David down, and they found them spread out over the land. They were eating and drinking and enjoying themselves because of all the loot they had taken from the land of the Philistines and from the land of Judah.
1SA 30:17 But David struck them down from twilight until the following evening. None of them escaped, with the exception of four hundred young men who got away on camels.
1SA 30:18 David retrieved everything the Amalekites had taken; he also rescued his two wives.
1SA 30:19 There was nothing missing, whether small or great. He retrieved sons and daughters, the plunder, and everything else they had taken. David brought everything back.
1SA 30:20 David took all the flocks and herds and drove them in front of the rest of the animals. People were saying, “This is David’s plunder!”
1SA 30:21 Then David approached the two hundred men who had been too exhausted to go with him, those whom they had left at the Wadi Besor. They went out to meet David and the people who were with him. When David approached the people, he asked how they were doing.
1SA 30:22 But all the evil and worthless men among those who had gone with David said, “Since they didn’t go with us, we won’t give them any of the loot we retrieved! They may take only their wives and children. Let them lead them away and be gone!”
1SA 30:23 But David said, “No! You shouldn’t do this, my brothers. Look at what the Lord has given us! He has protected us and has delivered into our hands the raiding party that came against us.
1SA 30:24 Who will listen to you in this matter? The portion of the one who went down into the battle will be the same as the portion of the one who remained with the equipment! Let their portions be the same!”
1SA 30:25 From that time onward it was a binding ordinance for Israel, right up to the present time.
1SA 30:26 When David came to Ziklag, he sent some of the plunder to the elders of Judah who were his friends, saying, “Here’s a gift for you from the looting of the Lord’s enemies!”
1SA 30:27 The gift was for those in the following locations: for those in Bethel, Ramoth Negev, and Jattir;
1SA 30:28 for those in Aroer, Siphmoth, Eshtemoa,
1SA 30:29 and Racal; for those in the cities of the Jerahmeelites and Kenites;
1SA 30:30 for those in Hormah, Bor Ashan, Athach,
1SA 30:31 and Hebron; and for those in whatever other places David and his men had traveled.
1SA 31:1 Now the Philistines were fighting against Israel. The men of Israel fled from the Philistines and many of them fell dead on Mount Gilboa.
1SA 31:2 The Philistines stayed right on the heels of Saul and his sons. They struck down Saul’s sons Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malki-Shua.
1SA 31:3 Saul himself was in the thick of the battle; the archers spotted him and wounded him severely.
1SA 31:4 Saul said to his armor bearer, “Draw your sword and stab me with it! Otherwise these uncircumcised people will come, stab me, and torture me.” But his armor bearer refused to do it, because he was very afraid. So Saul took his sword and fell on it.
1SA 31:5 When his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his own sword and died with him.
1SA 31:6 So Saul, his three sons, his armor bearer, and all his men died together that day.
1SA 31:7 When the men of Israel who were in the valley and across the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned the cities and fled. The Philistines came and occupied them.
1SA 31:8 The next day, when the Philistines came to strip loot from the corpses, they discovered Saul and his three sons lying dead on Mount Gilboa.
1SA 31:9 They cut off Saul’s head and stripped him of his armor. They sent messengers to announce the news in the temple of their idols and among their people throughout the surrounding land of the Philistines.
1SA 31:10 They placed Saul’s armor in the temple of the Ashtoreths and hung his corpse on the city wall of Beth Shan.
1SA 31:11 When the residents of Jabesh Gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul,
1SA 31:12 all their warriors set out and traveled throughout the night. They took Saul’s corpse and the corpses of his sons from the city wall of Beth Shan and went to Jabesh, where they burned them.
1SA 31:13 They took the bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree at Jabesh; then they fasted for seven days.
2SA 1:1 After the death of Saul, when David had returned from defeating the Amalekites, he stayed at Ziklag for two days.
2SA 1:2 On the third day a man arrived from the camp of Saul with his clothes torn and dirt on his head. When he approached David, the man threw himself to the ground.
2SA 1:3 David asked him, “Where are you coming from?” He replied, “I have escaped from the camp of Israel.”
2SA 1:4 David inquired, “How were things going? Tell me!” He replied, “The people fled from the battle and many of them fell dead. Even Saul and his son Jonathan are dead!”
2SA 1:5 David said to the young man who was telling him this, “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?”
2SA 1:6 The young man who was telling him this said, “I just happened to be on Mount Gilboa and came across Saul leaning on his spear for support. The chariots and leaders of the horsemen were in hot pursuit of him.
2SA 1:7 When he turned around and saw me, he called out to me. I answered, ‘Here I am!’
2SA 1:8 He asked me, ‘Who are you?’ I told him, ‘I’m an Amalekite.’
2SA 1:9 He said to me, ‘Stand over me and finish me off! I’m very dizzy, even though I’m still alive.’
2SA 1:10 So I stood over him and put him to death, since I knew that he couldn’t live in such a condition. Then I took the crown which was on his head and the bracelet which was on his arm. I have brought them here to my lord.”
2SA 1:11 David then grabbed his own clothes and tore them, as did all the men who were with him.
2SA 1:12 They lamented and wept and fasted until evening because Saul, his son Jonathan, the Lord’s people, and the house of Israel had fallen by the sword.
2SA 1:13 David said to the young man who told this to him, “Where are you from?” He replied, “I am an Amalekite, the son of a resident foreigner.”
2SA 1:14 David replied to him, “How is it that you were not afraid to reach out your hand to destroy the Lord’s anointed?”
2SA 1:15 Then David called one of the soldiers and said, “Come here and strike him down!” So he struck him down, and he died.
2SA 1:16 David said to him, “Your blood be on your own head! Your own mouth has testified against you, saying ‘I have put the Lord’s anointed to death.’”
2SA 1:17 Then David chanted this lament over Saul and his son Jonathan.
2SA 1:18 (He gave instructions that the people of Judah should be taught “The Bow.” Indeed, it is written down in the Book of Yashar.)
2SA 1:19 The beauty of Israel lies slain on your high places! How the mighty have fallen!
2SA 1:20 Don’t report it in Gath, don’t spread the news in the streets of Ashkelon, or the daughters of the Philistines will rejoice, the daughters of the uncircumcised will celebrate!
2SA 1:21 O mountains of Gilboa, may there be no dew or rain on you, nor fields of grain offerings! For it was there that the shield of warriors was defiled; the shield of Saul lies neglected without oil.
2SA 1:22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of warriors, the bow of Jonathan was not turned away. The sword of Saul never returned empty.
2SA 1:23 Saul and Jonathan were greatly loved during their lives, and not even in their deaths were they separated. They were swifter than eagles, stronger than lions.
2SA 1:24 O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet as well as jewelry, who put gold jewelry on your clothes.
2SA 1:25 How the warriors have fallen in the midst of battle! Jonathan lies slain on your high places!
2SA 1:26 I grieve over you, my brother Jonathan! You were very dear to me. Your love was more special to me than the love of women.
2SA 1:27 How the warriors have fallen! The weapons of war are destroyed!
2SA 2:1 Afterward David inquired of the Lord, “Should I go up to one of the cities of Judah?” The Lord told him, “Go up.” David asked, “Where should I go?” The Lord replied, “To Hebron.”
2SA 2:2 So David went up, along with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelite and Abigail, formerly the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
2SA 2:3 David also brought along the men who were with him, each with his family. They settled in the cities of Hebron.
2SA 2:4 The men of Judah came and there they anointed David as king over the people of Judah. David was told, “The people of Jabesh Gilead are the ones who buried Saul.”
2SA 2:5 So David sent messengers to the people of Jabesh Gilead and told them, “May you be blessed by the Lord because you have shown this kindness to your lord Saul by burying him.
2SA 2:6 Now may the Lord show you true kindness! I also will reward you, because you have done this deed.
2SA 2:7 Now be courageous and prove to be valiant warriors, for your lord Saul is dead. The people of Judah have anointed me as king over them.”
2SA 2:8 Now Abner son of Ner, the general in command of Saul’s army, had taken Saul’s son Ish-bosheth and had brought him to Mahanaim.
2SA 2:9 He appointed him king over Gilead, the Geshurites, Jezreel, Ephraim, Benjamin, and all Israel.
2SA 2:10 Ish-bosheth son of Saul was forty years old when he began to rule over Israel. He ruled two years. However, the people of Judah followed David.
2SA 2:11 David was king in Hebron over the people of Judah for seven and a half years.
2SA 2:12 Then Abner son of Ner and the servants of Ish-bosheth son of Saul went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
2SA 2:13 Joab son of Zeruiah and the servants of David also went out and confronted them at the pool of Gibeon. One group stationed themselves on one side of the pool, and the other group on the other side of the pool.
2SA 2:14 Abner said to Joab, “Let the soldiers get up and fight before us.” Joab said, “So be it!”
2SA 2:15 So they got up and crossed over by number: twelve belonging to Benjamin and to Ish-bosheth son of Saul, and twelve from the servants of David.
2SA 2:16 As they grappled with one another, each one stabbed his opponent with his sword and they fell dead together. So that place is called the Field of Flints; it is in Gibeon.
2SA 2:17 Now the battle was very severe that day; Abner and the men of Israel were overcome by David’s soldiers.
2SA 2:18 The three sons of Zeruiah were there – Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. (Now Asahel was as quick on his feet as one of the gazelles in the field.)
2SA 2:19 Asahel chased Abner, without turning to the right or to the left as he followed Abner.
2SA 2:20 Then Abner turned and asked, “Is that you, Asahel?” He replied, “Yes it is!”
2SA 2:21 Abner said to him, “Turn aside to your right or to your left. Capture one of the soldiers and take his equipment for yourself!” But Asahel was not willing to turn aside from following him.
2SA 2:22 So Abner spoke again to Asahel, “Turn aside from following me! I do not want to strike you to the ground. How then could I show my face in the presence of Joab your brother?”
2SA 2:23 But Asahel refused to turn aside. So Abner struck him in the abdomen with the back end of his spear. The spear came out his back; Asahel collapsed on the spot and died there right before Abner. Everyone who now comes to the place where Asahel fell dead pauses in respect.
2SA 2:24 So Joab and Abishai chased Abner. At sunset they came to the hill of Ammah near Giah on the way to the wilderness of Gibeon.
2SA 2:25 The Benjaminites formed their ranks behind Abner and were like a single army, standing at the top of a certain hill.
2SA 2:26 Then Abner called out to Joab, “Must the sword devour forever? Don’t you realize that this will turn bitter in the end? When will you tell the people to turn aside from pursuing their brothers?”
2SA 2:27 Joab replied, “As surely as God lives, if you had not said this, it would have been morning before the people would have abandoned pursuit of their brothers!”
2SA 2:28 Then Joab blew the ram’s horn and all the people stopped in their tracks. They stopped chasing Israel and ceased fighting.
2SA 2:29 Abner and his men went through the Arabah all that night. They crossed the Jordan River and went through the whole region of Bitron and came to Mahanaim.
2SA 2:30 Now Joab returned from chasing Abner and assembled all the people. Nineteen of David’s soldiers were missing, in addition to Asahel.
2SA 2:31 But David’s soldiers had slaughtered the Benjaminites and Abner’s men – in all, 360 men had died!
2SA 2:32 They took Asahel’s body and buried him in his father’s tomb at Bethlehem. Joab and his men then traveled all that night and reached Hebron by dawn.
2SA 3:1 However, the war was prolonged between the house of Saul and the house of David. David was becoming steadily stronger, while the house of Saul was becoming increasingly weaker.
2SA 3:2 Now sons were born to David in Hebron. His firstborn was Amnon, born to Ahinoam the Jezreelite.
2SA 3:3 His second son was Kileab, born to Abigail the widow of Nabal the Carmelite. His third son was Absalom, the son of Maacah daughter of King Talmai of Geshur.
2SA 3:4 His fourth son was Adonijah, the son of Haggith. His fifth son was Shephatiah, the son of Abitail.
2SA 3:5 His sixth son was Ithream, born to David’s wife Eglah. These sons were all born to David in Hebron.
2SA 3:6 As the war continued between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner was becoming more influential in the house of Saul.
2SA 3:7 Now Saul had a concubine named Rizpah daughter of Aiah. Ish-bosheth said to Abner, “Why did you have sexual relations with my father’s concubine?”
2SA 3:8 These words of Ish-bosheth really angered Abner and he said, “Am I the head of a dog that belongs to Judah? This very day I am demonstrating loyalty to the house of Saul your father and to his relatives and his friends! I have not betrayed you into the hand of David. Yet you have accused me of sinning with this woman today!
2SA 3:9 God will severely judge Abner if I do not do for David exactly what the Lord has promised him,
2SA 3:10 namely, to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul and to establish the throne of David over Israel and over Judah all the way from Dan to Beer Sheba!”
2SA 3:11 Ish-bosheth was unable to answer Abner with even a single word because he was afraid of him.
2SA 3:12 Then Abner sent messengers to David saying, “To whom does the land belong? Make an agreement with me, and I will do whatever I can to cause all Israel to turn to you.”
2SA 3:13 So David said, “Good! I will make an agreement with you. I ask only one thing from you. You will not see my face unless you bring Saul’s daughter Michal when you come to visit me.”
2SA 3:14 David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth son of Saul with this demand: “Give me my wife Michal whom I acquired for a hundred Philistine foreskins.”
2SA 3:15 So Ish-bosheth took her from her husband Paltiel son of Laish.
2SA 3:16 Her husband went along behind her, weeping all the way to Bahurim. Finally Abner said to him, “Go back!” So he returned home.
2SA 3:17 Abner advised the elders of Israel, “Previously you were wanting David to be your king.
2SA 3:18 Act now! For the Lord has said to David, ‘By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel from the Philistines and from all their enemies.’”
2SA 3:19 Then Abner spoke privately with the Benjaminites. Abner also went to Hebron to inform David privately of all that Israel and the entire house of Benjamin had agreed to.
2SA 3:20 When Abner, accompanied by twenty men, came to David in Hebron, David prepared a banquet for Abner and the men who were with him.
2SA 3:21 Abner said to David, “Let me leave so that I may go and gather all Israel to my lord the king so that they may make an agreement with you. Then you will rule over all that you desire.” So David sent Abner away, and he left in peace.
2SA 3:22 Now David’s soldiers and Joab were coming back from a raid, bringing a great deal of plunder with them. Abner was no longer with David in Hebron, for David had sent him away and he had left in peace.
2SA 3:23 When Joab and all the army that was with him arrived, Joab was told: “Abner the son of Ner came to the king; he sent him away, and he left in peace!”
2SA 3:24 So Joab went to the king and said, “What have you done? Abner has come to you! Why would you send him away? Now he’s gone on his way!
2SA 3:25 You know Abner the son of Ner! Surely he came here to spy on you and to determine when you leave and when you return and to discover everything that you are doing!”
2SA 3:26 Then Joab left David and sent messengers after Abner. They brought him back from the well of Sirah. (But David was not aware of it.)
2SA 3:27 When Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside at the gate as if to speak privately with him. Joab then stabbed him in the abdomen and killed him, avenging the shed blood of his brother Asahel.
2SA 3:28 When David later heard about this, he said, “I and my kingdom are forever innocent before the Lord of the shed blood of Abner son of Ner!
2SA 3:29 May his blood whirl over the head of Joab and the entire house of his father! May the males of Joab’s house never cease to have someone with a running sore or a skin disease or one who works at the spindle or one who falls by the sword or one who lacks food!”
2SA 3:30 So Joab and his brother Abishai killed Abner, because he had killed their brother Asahel in Gibeon during the battle.
2SA 3:31 David instructed Joab and all the people who were with him, “Tear your clothes! Put on sackcloth! Lament before Abner!” Now King David followed behind the funeral bier.
2SA 3:32 So they buried Abner in Hebron. The king cried loudly over Abner’s grave and all the people wept too.
2SA 3:33 The king chanted the following lament for Abner: “Should Abner have died like a fool?
2SA 3:34 Your hands were not bound, and your feet were not put into irons. You fell the way one falls before criminals.” All the people wept over him again.
2SA 3:35 Then all the people came and encouraged David to eat food while it was still day. But David took an oath saying, “God will punish me severely if I taste bread or anything whatsoever before the sun sets!”
2SA 3:36 All the people noticed this and it pleased them. In fact, everything the king did pleased all the people.
2SA 3:37 All the people and all Israel realized on that day that the killing of Abner son of Ner was not done at the king’s instigation.
2SA 3:38 Then the king said to his servants, “Do you not realize that a great leader has fallen this day in Israel?
2SA 3:39 Today I am weak, even though I am anointed as king. These men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too much for me to bear! May the Lord punish appropriately the one who has done this evil thing!”
2SA 4:1 When Ish-bosheth the son of Saul heard that Abner had died in Hebron, he was very disheartened, and all Israel was afraid.
2SA 4:2 Now Saul’s son had two men who were in charge of raiding units; one was named Baanah and the other Recab. They were sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, who was a Benjaminite. (Beeroth is regarded as belonging to Benjamin,
2SA 4:3 for the Beerothites fled to Gittaim and have remained there as resident foreigners until the present time.)
2SA 4:4 Now Saul’s son Jonathan had a son who was crippled in both feet. He was five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan arrived from Jezreel. His nurse picked him up and fled, but in her haste to get away, he fell and was injured. Mephibosheth was his name.
2SA 4:5 Now the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite – Recab and Baanah – went at the hottest part of the day to the home of Ish-bosheth, as he was enjoying his midday rest.
2SA 4:6 They entered the house under the pretense of getting wheat and mortally wounded him in the stomach. Then Recab and his brother Baanah escaped.
2SA 4:7 They had entered the house while Ish-bosheth was resting on his bed in his bedroom. They mortally wounded him and then cut off his head. Taking his head, they traveled on the way of the Arabah all that night.
2SA 4:8 They brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David in Hebron, saying to the king, “Look! The head of Ish-bosheth son of Saul, your enemy who sought your life! The Lord has granted vengeance to my lord the king this day against Saul and his descendants!”
2SA 4:9 David replied to Recab and his brother Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, “As surely as the Lord lives, who has delivered my life from all adversity,
2SA 4:10 when someone told me that Saul was dead – even though he thought he was bringing good news – I seized him and killed him in Ziklag. That was the good news I gave to him!
2SA 4:11 Surely when wicked men have killed an innocent man as he slept in his own house, should I not now require his blood from your hands and remove you from the earth?”
2SA 4:12 So David issued orders to the soldiers and they put them to death. Then they cut off their hands and feet and hung them near the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth and buried it in the tomb of Abner in Hebron.
2SA 5:1 All the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron saying, “Look, we are your very flesh and blood!
2SA 5:2 In the past, when Saul was our king, you were the real leader in Israel. The Lord said to you, ‘You will shepherd my people Israel; you will rule over Israel.’”
2SA 5:3 When all the leaders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, King David made an agreement with them in Hebron before the Lord. They designated David as king over Israel.
2SA 5:4 David was thirty years old when he began to reign and he reigned for forty years.
2SA 5:5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah for seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned for thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
2SA 5:6 Then the king and his men advanced to Jerusalem against the Jebusites who lived in the land. The Jebusites said to David, “You cannot invade this place! Even the blind and the lame will turn you back, saying, ‘David cannot invade this place!’”
2SA 5:7 But David captured the fortress of Zion (that is, the city of David).
2SA 5:8 David said on that day, “Whoever attacks the Jebusites must approach the ‘lame’ and the ‘blind’ who are David’s enemies by going through the water tunnel.” For this reason it is said, “The blind and the lame cannot enter the palace.”
2SA 5:9 So David lived in the fortress and called it the City of David. David built all around it, from the terrace inwards.
2SA 5:10 David’s power grew steadily, for the Lord God who commands armies was with him.
2SA 5:11 King Hiram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar logs, carpenters, and stonemasons. They built a palace for David.
2SA 5:12 David realized that the Lord had established him as king over Israel and that he had elevated his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.
2SA 5:13 David married more concubines and wives from Jerusalem after he arrived from Hebron. Even more sons and daughters were born to David.
2SA 5:14 These are the names of children born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,
2SA 5:15 Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia,
2SA 5:16 Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.
2SA 5:17 When the Philistines heard that David had been designated king over Israel, they all went up to search for David. When David heard about it, he went down to the fortress.
2SA 5:18 Now the Philistines had arrived and spread out in the valley of Rephaim.
2SA 5:19 So David asked the Lord, “Should I march up against the Philistines? Will you hand them over to me?” The Lord said to David, “March up, for I will indeed hand the Philistines over to you.”
2SA 5:20 So David marched against Baal Perazim and defeated them there. Then he said, “The Lord has burst out against my enemies like water bursts out.” So he called the name of that place Baal Perazim.
2SA 5:21 The Philistines abandoned their idols there, and David and his men picked them up.
2SA 5:22 The Philistines again came up and spread out in the valley of Rephaim.
2SA 5:23 So David asked the Lord what he should do. This time the Lord said to him, “Don’t march straight up. Instead, circle around behind them and come against them opposite the trees.
2SA 5:24 When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the trees, act decisively. For at that moment the Lord is going before you to strike down the army of the Philistines.”
2SA 5:25 David did just as the Lord commanded him, and he struck down the Philistines from Gibeon all the way to Gezer.
2SA 6:1 David again assembled all the best men in Israel, thirty thousand in number.
2SA 6:2 David and all the men who were with him traveled to Baalah in Judah to bring up from there the ark of God which is called by the name of the Lord of hosts, who sits enthroned between the cherubim that are on it.
2SA 6:3 They loaded the ark of God on a new cart and carried it from the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, were guiding the new cart.
2SA 6:4 They brought it with the ark of God up from the house of Abinadab on the hill. Ahio was walking in front of the ark,
2SA 6:5 while David and all Israel were energetically celebrating before the Lord, singing and playing various stringed instruments, tambourines, rattles, and cymbals.
2SA 6:6 When they arrived at the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah reached out and grabbed hold of the ark of God, because the oxen stumbled.
2SA 6:7 The Lord was so furious with Uzzah, he killed him on the spot for his negligence. He died right there beside the ark of God.
2SA 6:8 David was angry because the Lord attacked Uzzah; so he called that place Perez Uzzah, which remains its name to this very day.
2SA 6:9 David was afraid of the Lord that day and said, “How will the ark of the Lord ever come to me?”
2SA 6:10 So David was no longer willing to bring the ark of the Lord to be with him in the City of David. David left it in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite.
2SA 6:11 The ark of the Lord remained in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite for three months. The Lord blessed Obed-Edom and all his family.
2SA 6:12 David was told, “The Lord has blessed the family of Obed-Edom and everything he owns because of the ark of God.” So David went and joyfully brought the ark of God from the house of Obed-Edom to the City of David.
2SA 6:13 Those who carried the ark of the Lord took six steps and then David sacrificed an ox and a fatling calf.
2SA 6:14 Now David, wearing a linen ephod, was dancing with all his strength before the Lord.
2SA 6:15 David and all Israel were bringing up the ark of the Lord, shouting and blowing trumpets.
2SA 6:16 As the ark of the Lord entered the City of David, Saul’s daughter Michal looked out the window. When she saw King David leaping and dancing before the Lord, she despised him.
2SA 6:17 They brought the ark of the Lord and put it in its place in the middle of the tent that David had pitched for it. Then David offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings before the Lord.
2SA 6:18 When David finished offering the burnt sacrifices and peace offerings, he pronounced a blessing over the people in the name of the Lord of hosts.
2SA 6:19 He then handed out to each member of the entire assembly of Israel, both men and women, a portion of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake. Then all the people went home.
2SA 6:20 When David went home to pronounce a blessing on his own house, Michal, Saul’s daughter, came out to meet him. She said, “How the king of Israel has distinguished himself this day! He has exposed himself today before his servants’ slave girls the way a vulgar fool might do!”
2SA 6:21 David replied to Michal, “It was before the Lord! I was celebrating before the Lord, who chose me over your father and his entire family and appointed me as leader over the Lord’s people Israel.
2SA 6:22 I am willing to shame and humiliate myself even more than this! But with the slave girls whom you mentioned let me be distinguished!”
2SA 6:23 Now Michal, Saul’s daughter, had no children to the day of her death.
2SA 7:1 The king settled into his palace, for the Lord gave him relief from all his enemies on all sides.
2SA 7:2 The king said to Nathan the prophet, “Look! I am living in a palace made from cedar, while the ark of God sits in the middle of a tent.”
2SA 7:3 Nathan replied to the king, “You should go and do whatever you have in mind, for the Lord is with you.”
2SA 7:4 That night the Lord told Nathan,
2SA 7:5 “Go, tell my servant David: ‘This is what the Lord says: Do you really intend to build a house for me to live in?
2SA 7:6 I have not lived in a house from the time I brought the Israelites up from Egypt to the present day. Instead, I was traveling with them and living in a tent.
2SA 7:7 Wherever I moved among all the Israelites, I did not say to any of the leaders whom I appointed to care for my people Israel, “Why have you not built me a house made from cedar?”’
2SA 7:8 “So now, say this to my servant David: ‘This is what the Lord of hosts says: I took you from the pasture and from your work as a shepherd to make you leader of my people Israel.
2SA 7:9 I was with you wherever you went, and I defeated all your enemies before you. Now I will make you as famous as the great men of the earth.
2SA 7:10 I will establish a place for my people Israel and settle them there; they will live there and not be disturbed any more. Violent men will not oppress them again, as they did in the beginning
2SA 7:11 and during the time when I appointed judges to lead my people Israel. Instead, I will give you relief from all your enemies. The Lord declares to you that he himself will build a dynastic house for you.
2SA 7:12 When the time comes for you to die, I will raise up your descendant, one of your own sons, to succeed you, and I will establish his kingdom.
2SA 7:13 He will build a house for my name, and I will make his dynasty permanent.
2SA 7:14 I will become his father and he will become my son. When he sins, I will correct him with the rod of men and with wounds inflicted by human beings.
2SA 7:15 But my loyal love will not be removed from him as I removed it from Saul, whom I removed from before you.
2SA 7:16 Your house and your kingdom will stand before me permanently; your dynasty will be permanent.’”
2SA 7:17 Nathan told David all these words that were revealed to him.
2SA 7:18 King David went in, sat before the Lord, and said, “Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my family, that you should have brought me to this point?
2SA 7:19 And you didn’t stop there, O Lord God! You have also spoken about the future of your servant’s family. Is this your usual way of dealing with men, O Lord God?
2SA 7:20 What more can David say to you? You have given your servant special recognition, O Lord God!
2SA 7:21 For the sake of your promise and according to your purpose you have done this great thing in order to reveal it to your servant.
2SA 7:22 Therefore you are great, O Lord God, for there is none like you! There is no God besides you! What we have heard is true!
2SA 7:23 Who is like your people, Israel, a unique nation on the earth? Their God went to claim a nation for himself and to make a name for himself! You did great and awesome acts for your land, before your people whom you delivered for yourself from the Egyptian empire and its gods.
2SA 7:24 You made Israel your very own people for all time. You, O Lord, became their God.
2SA 7:25 So now, O Lord God, make this promise you have made about your servant and his family a permanent reality. Do as you promised,
2SA 7:26 so you may gain lasting fame, as people say, ‘The Lord of hosts is God over Israel!’ The dynasty of your servant David will be established before you,
2SA 7:27 for you, O Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have told your servant, ‘I will build you a dynastic house.’ That is why your servant has had the courage to pray this prayer to you.
2SA 7:28 Now, O sovereign Lord, you are the true God! May your words prove to be true! You have made this good promise to your servant!
2SA 7:29 Now be willing to bless your servant’s dynasty so that it may stand permanently before you, for you, O sovereign Lord, have spoken. By your blessing may your servant’s dynasty be blessed on into the future!”
2SA 8:1 Later David defeated the Philistines and subdued them. David took Metheg Ammah from the Philistines.
2SA 8:2 He defeated the Moabites. He made them lie on the ground and then used a rope to measure them off. He put two-thirds of them to death and spared the other third. The Moabites became David’s subjects and brought tribute.
2SA 8:3 David defeated King Hadadezer son of Rehob of Zobah when he came to reestablish his authority over the Euphrates River.
2SA 8:4 David seized from him 1,700 charioteers and 20,000 infantrymen. David cut the hamstrings of all but a hundred of the chariot horses.
2SA 8:5 The Arameans of Damascus came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, but David killed 22,000 of the Arameans.
2SA 8:6 David placed garrisons in the territory of the Arameans of Damascus; the Arameans became David’s subjects and brought tribute. The Lord protected David wherever he campaigned.
2SA 8:7 David took the golden shields that belonged to Hadadezer’s servants and brought them to Jerusalem.
2SA 8:8 From Tebah and Berothai, Hadadezer’s cities, King David took a great deal of bronze.
2SA 8:9 When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer,
2SA 8:10 he sent his son Joram to King David to extend his best wishes and to pronounce a blessing on him for his victory over Hadadezer, for Toi had been at war with Hadadezer. He brought with him various items made of silver, gold, and bronze.
2SA 8:11 King David dedicated these things to the Lord, along with the dedicated silver and gold that he had taken from all the nations that he had subdued,
2SA 8:12 including Aram, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amelek. This also included some of the plunder taken from King Hadadezer son of Rehob of Zobah.
2SA 8:13 David became famous when he returned from defeating the Arameans in the Valley of Salt, he defeated 18,000 in all.
2SA 8:14 He placed garrisons throughout Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. The Lord protected David wherever he campaigned.
2SA 8:15 David reigned over all Israel; he guaranteed justice for all his people.
2SA 8:16 Joab son of Zeruiah was general in command of the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was secretary;
2SA 8:17 Zadok son of Ahitub and Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Seraiah was scribe;
2SA 8:18 Benaiah son of Jehoida supervised the Kerithites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were priests.
2SA 9:1 Then David asked, “Is anyone still left from the family of Saul, so that I may extend kindness to him for the sake of Jonathan?”
2SA 9:2 Now there was a servant from Saul’s house named Ziba, so he was summoned to David. The king asked him, “Are you Ziba?” He replied, “At your service.”
2SA 9:3 The king asked, “Is there not someone left from Saul’s family, that I may extend God’s kindness to him?” Ziba said to the king, “One of Jonathan’s sons is left; both of his feet are crippled.”
2SA 9:4 The king asked him, “Where is he?” Ziba told the king, “He is at the house of Makir son of Ammiel in Lo Debar.
2SA 9:5 So King David had him brought from the house of Makir son of Ammiel in Lo Debar.
2SA 9:6 When Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David, he bowed low with his face toward the ground. David said, “Mephibosheth?” He replied, “Yes, at your service.”
2SA 9:7 David said to him, “Don’t be afraid, because I will certainly extend kindness to you for the sake of Jonathan your father. You will be a regular guest at my table.”
2SA 9:8 Then Mephibosheth bowed and said, “Of what importance am I, your servant, that you show regard for a dead dog like me?”
2SA 9:9 Then the king summoned Ziba, Saul’s attendant, and said to him, “Everything that belonged to Saul and to his entire house I hereby give to your master’s grandson.
2SA 9:10 You will cultivate the land for him – you and your sons and your servants. You will bring its produce and it will be food for your master’s grandson to eat. But Mephibosheth, your master’s grandson, will be a regular guest at my table.” (Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.)
2SA 9:11 Ziba said to the king, “Your servant will do everything that my lord the king has instructed his servant to do.” So Mephibosheth was a regular guest at David’s table, just as though he were one of the king’s sons.
2SA 9:12 Now Mephibosheth had a young son whose name was Mica. All the members of Ziba’s household were Mephibosheth’s servants.
2SA 9:13 Mephibosheth was living in Jerusalem, for he was a regular guest at the king’s table. But both his feet were crippled.
2SA 10:1 Later the king of the Ammonites died and his son Hanun succeeded him.
2SA 10:2 David said, “I will express my loyalty to Hanun son of Nahash just as his father was loyal to me.” So David sent his servants with a message expressing sympathy over his father’s death. When David’s servants entered the land of the Ammonites,
2SA 10:3 the Ammonite officials said to their lord Hanun, “Do you really think David is trying to honor your father by sending these messengers to express his sympathy? No, David has sent his servants to you to get information about the city and spy on it so they can overthrow it!”
2SA 10:4 So Hanun seized David’s servants and shaved off half of each one’s beard. He cut the lower part of their robes off so that their buttocks were exposed, and then sent them away.
2SA 10:5 Messengers told David what had happened, so he summoned them, for the men were thoroughly humiliated. The king said, “Stay in Jericho until your beards have grown again; then you may come back.”
2SA 10:6 When the Ammonites realized that David was disgusted with them, they sent and hired 20,000 foot soldiers from Aram Beth Rehob and Aram Zobah, in addition to 1,000 men from the king of Maacah and 12,000 men from Ish-tob.
2SA 10:7 When David heard the news, he sent Joab and the entire army to meet them.
2SA 10:8 The Ammonites marched out and were deployed for battle at the entrance of the city gate, while the men from Aram Zobah, Rehob, Ish-tob, and Maacah were by themselves in the field.
2SA 10:9 When Joab saw that the battle would be fought on two fronts, he chose some of Israel’s best men and deployed them against the Arameans.
2SA 10:10 He put his brother Abishai in charge of the rest of the army and they were deployed against the Ammonites.
2SA 10:11 Joab said, “If the Arameans start to overpower me, you come to my rescue. If the Ammonites start to overpower you, I will come to your rescue.
2SA 10:12 Be strong! Let’s fight bravely for the sake of our people and the cities of our God! The Lord will do what he decides is best!”
2SA 10:13 So Joab and his men marched out to do battle with the Arameans, and they fled before him.
2SA 10:14 When the Ammonites saw the Arameans flee, they fled before his brother Abishai and went into the city. Joab withdrew from fighting the Ammonites and returned to Jerusalem.
2SA 10:15 When the Arameans realized that they had been defeated by Israel, they consolidated their forces.
2SA 10:16 Then Hadadezer sent for Arameans from beyond the Euphrates River, and they came to Helam. Shobach, the general in command of Hadadezer’s army, led them.
2SA 10:17 When David was informed, he gathered all Israel, crossed the Jordan River, and came to Helam. The Arameans deployed their forces against David and fought with him.
2SA 10:18 The Arameans fled before Israel. David killed 700 Aramean charioteers and 40,000 foot soldiers. He also struck down Shobach, the general in command of the army, who died there.
2SA 10:19 When all the kings who were subject to Hadadezer saw they were defeated by Israel, they made peace with Israel and became subjects of Israel. The Arameans were no longer willing to help the Ammonites.
2SA 11:1 In the spring of the year, at the time when kings normally conduct wars, David sent out Joab with his officers and the entire Israelite army. They defeated the Ammonites and besieged Rabbah. But David stayed behind in Jerusalem.
2SA 11:2 One evening David got up from his bed and walked around on the roof of his palace. From the roof he saw a woman bathing. Now this woman was very attractive.
2SA 11:3 So David sent someone to inquire about the woman. The messenger said, “Isn’t this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?”
2SA 11:4 David sent some messengers to get her. She came to him and he had sexual relations with her. (Now at that time she was in the process of purifying herself from her menstrual uncleanness.) Then she returned to her home.
2SA 11:5 The woman conceived and then sent word to David saying, “I’m pregnant.”
2SA 11:6 So David sent a message to Joab that said, “Send me Uriah the Hittite.” So Joab sent Uriah to David.
2SA 11:7 When Uriah came to him, David asked about how Joab and the army were doing and how the campaign was going.
2SA 11:8 Then David said to Uriah, “Go down to your home and relax.” When Uriah left the palace, the king sent a gift to him.
2SA 11:9 But Uriah stayed at the door of the palace with all the servants of his lord. He did not go down to his house.
2SA 11:10 So they informed David, “Uriah has not gone down to his house.” So David said to Uriah, “Haven’t you just arrived from a journey? Why haven’t you gone down to your house?”
2SA 11:11 Uriah replied to David, “The ark and Israel and Judah reside in temporary shelters, and my lord Joab and my lord’s soldiers are camping in the open field. Should I go to my house to eat and drink and have marital relations with my wife? As surely as you are alive, I will not do this thing!”
2SA 11:12 So David said to Uriah, “Stay here another day. Tomorrow I will send you back.” So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem both that day and the following one.
2SA 11:13 Then David summoned him. He ate and drank with him, and got him drunk. But in the evening he went out to sleep on his bed with the servants of his lord; he did not go down to his own house.
2SA 11:14 In the morning David wrote a letter to Joab and sent it with Uriah.
2SA 11:15 In the letter he wrote: “Station Uriah in the thick of the battle and then withdraw from him so he will be cut down and killed.”
2SA 11:16 So as Joab kept watch on the city, he stationed Uriah at the place where he knew the best enemy soldiers were.
2SA 11:17 When the men of the city came out and fought with Joab, some of David’s soldiers fell in battle. Uriah the Hittite also died.
2SA 11:18 Then Joab sent a full battle report to David.
2SA 11:19 He instructed the messenger as follows: “When you finish giving the battle report to the king,
2SA 11:20 if the king becomes angry and asks you, ‘Why did you go so close to the city to fight? Didn’t you realize they would shoot from the wall?
2SA 11:21 Who struck down Abimelech the son of Jerub-Besheth? Didn’t a woman throw an upper millstone down on him from the wall so that he died in Thebez? Why did you go so close to the wall?’ just say to him, ‘Your servant Uriah the Hittite is also dead.’”
2SA 11:22 So the messenger departed. When he arrived, he informed David of all the news that Joab had sent with him.
2SA 11:23 The messenger said to David, “The men overpowered us and attacked us in the field. But we forced them to retreat all the way to the door of the city gate.
2SA 11:24 Then the archers shot at your servants from the wall and some of the king’s soldiers died. Your servant Uriah the Hittite is also dead.”
2SA 11:25 David said to the messenger, “Tell Joab, ‘Don’t let this thing upset you. There is no way to anticipate whom the sword will cut down. Press the battle against the city and conquer it.’ Encourage him with these words.”
2SA 11:26 When Uriah’s wife heard that her husband Uriah was dead, she mourned for him.
2SA 11:27 When the time of mourning passed, David had her brought to his palace. She became his wife and she bore him a son. But what David had done upset the Lord.
2SA 12:1 So the Lord sent Nathan to David. When he came to David, Nathan said, “There were two men in a certain city, one rich and the other poor.
2SA 12:2 The rich man had a great many flocks and herds.
2SA 12:3 But the poor man had nothing except for a little lamb he had acquired. He raised it, and it grew up alongside him and his children. It used to eat his food, drink from his cup, and sleep in his arms. It was just like a daughter to him.
2SA 12:4 “When a traveler arrived at the rich man’s home, he did not want to use one of his own sheep or cattle to feed the traveler who had come to visit him. Instead, he took the poor man’s lamb and cooked it for the man who had come to visit him.”
2SA 12:5 Then David became very angry at this man. He said to Nathan, “As surely as the Lord lives, the man who did this deserves to die!
2SA 12:6 Because he committed this cold-hearted crime, he must pay for the lamb four times over!”
2SA 12:7 Nathan said to David, “You are that man! This is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘I chose you to be king over Israel and I rescued you from the hand of Saul.
2SA 12:8 I gave you your master’s house, and put your master’s wives into your arms. I also gave you the house of Israel and Judah. And if all that somehow seems insignificant, I would have given you so much more as well!
2SA 12:9 Why have you shown contempt for the word of the Lord by doing evil in my sight? You have struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword and you have taken his wife as your own! You have killed him with the sword of the Ammonites.
2SA 12:10 So now the sword will never depart from your house. For you have despised me by taking the wife of Uriah the Hittite as your own!’
2SA 12:11 This is what the Lord says: ‘I am about to bring disaster on you from inside your own household! Right before your eyes I will take your wives and hand them over to your companion. He will have sexual relations with your wives in broad daylight!
2SA 12:12 Although you have acted in secret, I will do this thing before all Israel, and in broad daylight.’”
2SA 12:13 Then David exclaimed to Nathan, “I have sinned against the Lord!” Nathan replied to David, “Yes, and the Lord has forgiven your sin. You are not going to die.
2SA 12:14 Nonetheless, because you have treated the Lord with such contempt in this matter, the son who has been born to you will certainly die.”
2SA 12:15 Then Nathan went to his home. The Lord struck the child that Uriah’s wife had borne to David, and the child became very ill.
2SA 12:16 Then David prayed to God for the child and fasted. He would even go and spend the night lying on the ground.
2SA 12:17 The elders of his house stood over him and tried to lift him from the ground, but he was unwilling, and refused to eat food with them.
2SA 12:18 On the seventh day the child died. But the servants of David were afraid to inform him that the child had died, for they said, “While the child was still alive he would not listen to us when we spoke to him. How can we tell him that the child is dead? He will do himself harm!”
2SA 12:19 When David saw that his servants were whispering to one another, he realized that the child was dead. So David asked his servants, “Is the child dead?” They replied, “Yes, he’s dead.”
2SA 12:20 So David got up from the ground, bathed, put on oil, and changed his clothes. He went to the house of the Lord and worshiped. Then, when he entered his palace, he requested that food be brought to him, and he ate.
2SA 12:21 His servants said to him, “What is this that you have done? While the child was still alive, you fasted and wept. Once the child was dead you got up and ate food!”
2SA 12:22 He replied, “While the child was still alive, I fasted and wept because I thought, ‘Perhaps the Lord will show pity and the child will live.
2SA 12:23 But now he is dead. Why should I fast? Am I able to bring him back? I will go to him, but he cannot return to me!’”
2SA 12:24 So David comforted his wife Bathsheba. He went to her and had marital relations with her. She gave birth to a son, and David named him Solomon. Now the Lord loved the child
2SA 12:25 and sent word through Nathan the prophet that he should be named Jedidiah for the Lord’s sake.
2SA 12:26 So Joab fought against Rabbah of the Ammonites and captured the royal city.
2SA 12:27 Joab then sent messengers to David, saying, “I have fought against Rabbah and have captured the water supply of the city.
2SA 12:28 So now assemble the rest of the army and besiege the city and capture it. Otherwise I will capture the city and it will be named for me.”
2SA 12:29 So David assembled all the army and went to Rabbah and fought against it and captured it.
2SA 12:30 He took the crown of their king from his head – it was gold, weighed about seventy-five pounds, and held a precious stone – and it was placed on David’s head. He also took from the city a great deal of plunder.
2SA 12:31 He removed the people who were in it and made them do hard labor with saws, iron picks, and iron axes, putting them to work at the brick kiln. This was his policy with all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all the army returned to Jerusalem.
2SA 13:1 Now David’s son Absalom had a beautiful sister named Tamar. In the course of time David’s son Amnon fell madly in love with her.
2SA 13:2 But Amnon became frustrated because he was so lovesick over his sister Tamar. For she was a virgin, and to Amnon it seemed out of the question to do anything to her.
2SA 13:3 Now Amnon had a friend named Jonadab, the son of David’s brother Shimeah. Jonadab was a very crafty man.
2SA 13:4 He asked Amnon, “Why are you, the king’s son, so depressed every morning? Can’t you tell me?” So Amnon said to him, “I’m in love with Tamar the sister of my brother Absalom.”
2SA 13:5 Jonadab replied to him, “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be sick. When your father comes in to see you, say to him, ‘Please let my sister Tamar come in so she can fix some food for me. Let her prepare the food in my sight so I can watch. Then I will eat from her hand.’”
2SA 13:6 So Amnon lay down and pretended to be sick. When the king came in to see him, Amnon said to the king, “Please let my sister Tamar come in so she can make a couple of cakes in my sight. Then I will eat from her hand.”
2SA 13:7 So David sent Tamar to the house saying, “Please go to the house of Amnon your brother and prepare some food for him.”
2SA 13:8 So Tamar went to the house of Amnon her brother, who was lying down. She took the dough, kneaded it, made some cakes while he watched, and baked them.
2SA 13:9 But when she took the pan and set it before him, he refused to eat. Instead Amnon said, “Get everyone out of here!” So everyone left.
2SA 13:10 Then Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the cakes into the bedroom; then I will eat from your hand.” So Tamar took the cakes that she had prepared and brought them to her brother Amnon in the bedroom.
2SA 13:11 As she brought them to him to eat, he grabbed her and said to her, “Come on! Get in bed with me, my sister!”
2SA 13:12 But she said to him, “No, my brother! Don’t humiliate me! This just isn’t done in Israel! Don’t do this foolish thing!
2SA 13:13 How could I ever be rid of my humiliation? And you would be considered one of the fools in Israel! Just speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.”
2SA 13:14 But he refused to listen to her. He overpowered her and humiliated her by raping her.
2SA 13:15 Then Amnon greatly despised her. His disdain toward her surpassed the love he had previously felt toward her. Amnon said to her, “Get up and leave!”
2SA 13:16 But she said to him, “No I won’t, for sending me away now would be worse than what you did to me earlier!” But he refused to listen to her.
2SA 13:17 He called his personal attendant and said to him, “Take this woman out of my sight and lock the door behind her!”
2SA 13:18 (Now she was wearing a long robe, for this is what the king’s virgin daughters used to wear.) So Amnon’s attendant removed her and bolted the door behind her.
2SA 13:19 Then Tamar put ashes on her head and tore the long robe she was wearing. She put her hands on her head and went on her way, wailing as she went.
2SA 13:20 Her brother Absalom said to her, “Was Amnon your brother with you? Now be quiet, my sister. He is your brother. Don’t take it so seriously!” Tamar, devastated, lived in the house of her brother Absalom.
2SA 13:21 Now King David heard about all these things and was very angry.
2SA 13:22 But Absalom said nothing to Amnon, either bad or good, yet Absalom hated Amnon because he had humiliated his sister Tamar.
2SA 13:23 Two years later Absalom’s sheepshearers were in Baal Hazor, near Ephraim. Absalom invited all the king’s sons.
2SA 13:24 Then Absalom went to the king and said, “My shearers have begun their work. Let the king and his servants go with me.”
2SA 13:25 But the king said to Absalom, “No, my son. We shouldn’t all go. We shouldn’t burden you in that way.” Though Absalom pressed him, the king was not willing to go. Instead, David blessed him.
2SA 13:26 Then Absalom said, “If you will not go, then let my brother Amnon go with us.” The king replied to him, “Why should he go with you?”
2SA 13:27 But when Absalom pressed him, he sent Amnon and all the king’s sons along with him.
2SA 13:28 Absalom instructed his servants, “Look! When Amnon is drunk and I say to you, ‘Strike Amnon down,’ kill him then and there. Don’t fear! Is it not I who have given you these instructions? Be strong and courageous!”
2SA 13:29 So Absalom’s servants did to Amnon exactly what Absalom had instructed. Then all the king’s sons got up; each one rode away on his mule and fled.
2SA 13:30 While they were still on their way, the following report reached David: “Absalom has killed all the king’s sons; not one of them is left!”
2SA 13:31 Then the king stood up and tore his garments and lay down on the ground. All his servants were standing there with torn garments as well.
2SA 13:32 Jonadab, the son of David’s brother Shimeah, said, “My lord should not say, ‘They have killed all the young men who are the king’s sons.’ For only Amnon is dead. This is what Absalom has talked about from the day that Amnon humiliated his sister Tamar.
2SA 13:33 Now don’t let my lord the king be concerned about the report that has come saying, ‘All the king’s sons are dead.’ It is only Amnon who is dead.”
2SA 13:34 In the meantime Absalom fled. When the servant who was the watchman looked up, he saw many people coming from the west on a road beside the hill.
2SA 13:35 Jonadab said to the king, “Look! The king’s sons have come! It’s just as I said!”
2SA 13:36 Just as he finished speaking, the king’s sons arrived, wailing and weeping. The king and all his servants wept loudly as well.
2SA 13:37 But Absalom fled and went to King Talmai son of Ammihud of Geshur. And David grieved over his son every day.
2SA 13:38 After Absalom fled and went to Geshur, he remained there for three years.
2SA 13:39 The king longed to go to Absalom, for he had since been consoled over the death of Amnon.
2SA 14:1 Now Joab son of Zeruiah realized that the king longed to see Absalom.
2SA 14:2 So Joab sent to Tekoa and brought from there a wise woman. He told her, “Pretend to be in mourning and put on garments for mourning. Don’t anoint yourself with oil. Instead, act like a woman who has been mourning for the dead for some time.
2SA 14:3 Go to the king and speak to him in the following fashion.” Then Joab told her what to say.
2SA 14:4 So the Tekoan woman went to the king. She bowed down with her face to the ground in deference to him and said, “Please help me, O king!”
2SA 14:5 The king replied to her, “What do you want?” She answered, “I am a widow; my husband is dead.
2SA 14:6 Your servant has two sons. When the two of them got into a fight in the field, there was no one present who could intervene. One of them struck the other and killed him.
2SA 14:7 Now the entire family has risen up against your servant, saying, ‘Turn over the one who struck down his brother, so that we can execute him and avenge the death of his brother whom he killed. In so doing we will also destroy the heir.’ They want to extinguish my remaining coal, leaving no one on the face of the earth to carry on the name of my husband.”
2SA 14:8 Then the king told the woman, “Go to your home. I will give instructions concerning your situation.”
2SA 14:9 The Tekoan woman said to the king, “My lord the king, let any blame fall on me and on the house of my father. But let the king and his throne be innocent!”
2SA 14:10 The king said, “Bring to me whoever speaks to you, and he won’t bother you again!”
2SA 14:11 She replied, “In that case, let the king invoke the name of the Lord your God so that the avenger of blood may not kill! Then they will not destroy my son!” He replied, “As surely as the Lord lives, not a single hair of your son’s head will fall to the ground.”
2SA 14:12 Then the woman said, “Please permit your servant to speak to my lord the king about another matter.” He replied, “Tell me.”
2SA 14:13 The woman said, “Why have you devised something like this against God’s people? When the king speaks in this fashion, he makes himself guilty, for the king has not brought back the one he has banished.
2SA 14:14 Certainly we must die, and are like water spilled on the ground that cannot be gathered up again. But God does not take away life; instead he devises ways for the banished to be restored.
2SA 14:15 I have now come to speak with my lord the king about this matter, because the people have made me fearful. But your servant said, ‘I will speak to the king! Perhaps the king will do what his female servant asks.
2SA 14:16 Yes! The king may listen and deliver his female servant from the hand of the man who seeks to remove both me and my son from the inheritance God has given us!’
2SA 14:17 So your servant said, ‘May the word of my lord the king be my security, for my lord the king is like the angel of God when it comes to deciding between right and wrong! May the Lord your God be with you!’”
2SA 14:18 Then the king replied to the woman, “Don’t hide any information from me when I question you.” The woman said, “Let my lord the king speak!”
2SA 14:19 The king said, “Did Joab put you up to all of this?” The woman answered, “As surely as you live, my lord the king, there is no deviation to the right or to the left from all that my lord the king has said. For your servant Joab gave me instructions. He has put all these words in your servant’s mouth.
2SA 14:20 Your servant Joab did this so as to change this situation. But my lord has wisdom like that of the angel of God, and knows everything that is happening in the land.”
2SA 14:21 Then the king said to Joab, “All right! I will do this thing! Go and bring back the young man Absalom!
2SA 14:22 Then Joab bowed down with his face toward the ground and thanked the king. Joab said, “Today your servant knows that I have found favor in your sight, my lord the king, because the king has granted the request of your servant!”
2SA 14:23 So Joab got up and went to Geshur and brought Absalom back to Jerusalem.
2SA 14:24 But the king said, “Let him go over to his own house. He may not see my face.” So Absalom went over to his own house; he did not see the king’s face.
2SA 14:25 Now in all Israel everyone acknowledged that there was no man as handsome as Absalom. From the sole of his feet to the top of his head he was perfect in appearance.
2SA 14:26 When he would shave his head – at the end of every year he used to shave his head, for it grew too long and he would shave it – he used to weigh the hair of his head at three pounds according to the king’s weight.
2SA 14:27 Absalom had three sons and one daughter, whose name was Tamar. She was a very attractive woman.
2SA 14:28 Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years without seeing the king’s face.
2SA 14:29 Then Absalom sent a message to Joab asking him to send him to the king, but Joab was not willing to come to him. So he sent a second message to him, but he still was not willing to come.
2SA 14:30 So he said to his servants, “Look, Joab has a portion of field adjacent to mine and he has some barley there. Go and set it on fire.” So Absalom’s servants set Joab’s portion of the field on fire.
2SA 14:31 Then Joab got up and came to Absalom’s house. He said to him, “Why did your servants set my portion of field on fire?”
2SA 14:32 Absalom said to Joab, “Look, I sent a message to you saying, ‘Come here so that I can send you to the king with this message: “Why have I come from Geshur? It would be better for me if I were still there.”’ Let me now see the face of the king. If I am at fault, let him put me to death!”
2SA 14:33 So Joab went to the king and informed him. The king summoned Absalom, and he came to the king. Absalom bowed down before the king with his face toward the ground and the king kissed him.
2SA 15:1 Some time later Absalom managed to acquire a chariot and horses, as well as fifty men to serve as his royal guard.
2SA 15:2 Now Absalom used to get up early and stand beside the road that led to the city gate. Whenever anyone came by who had a complaint to bring to the king for arbitration, Absalom would call out to him, “What city are you from?” The person would answer, “I, your servant, am from one of the tribes of Israel.”
2SA 15:3 Absalom would then say to him, “Look, your claims are legitimate and appropriate. But there is no representative of the king who will listen to you.”
2SA 15:4 Absalom would then say, “If only they would make me a judge in the land! Then everyone who had a judicial complaint could come to me and I would make sure he receives a just settlement.”
2SA 15:5 When someone approached to bow before him, Absalom would extend his hand and embrace him and kiss him.
2SA 15:6 Absalom acted this way toward everyone in Israel who came to the king for justice. In this way Absalom won the loyalty of the citizens of Israel.
2SA 15:7 After four years Absalom said to the king, “Let me go and repay my vow that I made to the Lord while I was in Hebron.
2SA 15:8 For I made this vow when I was living in Geshur in Aram: ‘If the Lord really does allow me to return to Jerusalem, I will serve the Lord.’”
2SA 15:9 The king replied to him, “Go in peace.” So Absalom got up and went to Hebron.
2SA 15:10 Then Absalom sent spies through all the tribes of Israel who said, “When you hear the sound of the horn, you may assume that Absalom rules in Hebron.”
2SA 15:11 Now two hundred men had gone with Absalom from Jerusalem. Since they were invited, they went naively and were unaware of what Absalom was planning.
2SA 15:12 While he was offering sacrifices, Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s adviser, to come from his city, Giloh. The conspiracy was gaining momentum, and the people were starting to side with Absalom.
2SA 15:13 Then a messenger came to David and reported, “The men of Israel are loyal to Absalom!”
2SA 15:14 So David said to all his servants who were with him in Jerusalem, “Come on! Let’s escape! Otherwise no one will be delivered from Absalom! Go immediately, or else he will quickly overtake us and bring disaster on us and kill the city’s residents with the sword.”
2SA 15:15 The king’s servants replied to the king, “We will do whatever our lord the king decides.”
2SA 15:16 So the king and all the members of his royal court set out on foot, though the king left behind ten concubines to attend to the palace.
2SA 15:17 The king and all the people set out on foot, pausing at a spot some distance away.
2SA 15:18 All his servants were leaving with him, along with all the Kerethites, all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites – some six hundred men who had come on foot from Gath. They were leaving with the king.
2SA 15:19 Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, “Why should you come with us? Go back and stay with the new king, for you are a foreigner and an exile from your own country.
2SA 15:20 It seems like you arrived just yesterday. Today should I make you wander around by going with us? I go where I must go. But as for you, go back and take your men with you. May genuine loyal love protect you!”
2SA 15:21 But Ittai replied to the king, “As surely as the Lord lives and as my lord the king lives, wherever my lord the king is, whether dead or alive, there I will be as well!”
2SA 15:22 So David said to Ittai, “Come along then.” So Ittai the Gittite went along, accompanied by all his men and all the dependents who were with him.
2SA 15:23 All the land was weeping loudly as all these people were leaving. As the king was crossing over the Kidron Valley, all the people were leaving on the road that leads to the desert.
2SA 15:24 Zadok and all the Levites who were with him were carrying the ark of the covenant of God. When they positioned the ark of God, Abiathar offered sacrifices until all the people had finished leaving the city.
2SA 15:25 Then the king said to Zadok, “Take the ark of God back to the city. If I find favor in the Lord’s sight he will bring me back and enable me to see both it and his dwelling place again.
2SA 15:26 However, if he should say, ‘I do not take pleasure in you,’ then he will deal with me in a way that he considers appropriate.”
2SA 15:27 The king said to Zadok the priest, “Are you a seer? Go back to the city in peace! Your son Ahimaaz and Abiathar’s son Jonathan may go with you and Abiathar.
2SA 15:28 Look, I will be waiting at the fords of the desert until word from you reaches me.”
2SA 15:29 So Zadok and Abiathar took the ark of God back to Jerusalem and remained there.
2SA 15:30 As David was going up the Mount of Olives, he was weeping as he went; his head was covered and his feet were bare. All the people who were with him also had their heads covered and were weeping as they went up.
2SA 15:31 Now David had been told, “Ahithophel has sided with the conspirators who are with Absalom. So David prayed, “Make the advice of Ahithophel foolish, O Lord!”
2SA 15:32 When David reached the summit, where he used to worship God, Hushai the Arkite met him with his clothes torn and dirt on his head.
2SA 15:33 David said to him, “If you leave with me you will be a burden to me.
2SA 15:34 But you will be able to counter the advice of Ahithophel if you go back to the city and say to Absalom, ‘I will be your servant, O king! Previously I was your father’s servant, and now I will be your servant.’
2SA 15:35 Zadok and Abiathar the priests will be there with you. Everything you hear in the king’s palace you must tell Zadok and Abiathar the priests.
2SA 15:36 Furthermore, their two sons are there with them, Zadok’s son Ahimaaz and Abiathar’s son Jonathan. You must send them to me with any information you hear.”
2SA 15:37 So David’s friend Hushai arrived in the city, just as Absalom was entering Jerusalem.
2SA 16:1 When David had gone a short way beyond the summit, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth was there to meet him. He had a couple of donkeys that were saddled, and on them were two hundred loaves of bread, a hundred raisin cakes, a hundred baskets of summer fruit, and a container of wine.
2SA 16:2 The king asked Ziba, “Why did you bring these things?” Ziba replied, “The donkeys are for the king’s family to ride on, the loaves of bread and the summer fruit are for the attendants to eat, and the wine is for those who get exhausted in the desert.”
2SA 16:3 The king asked, “Where is your master’s grandson?” Ziba replied to the king, “He remains in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will give back to me my grandfather’s kingdom.’”
2SA 16:4 The king said to Ziba, “Everything that was Mephibosheth’s now belongs to you.” Ziba replied, “I bow before you. May I find favor in your sight, my lord the king.”
2SA 16:5 Then King David reached Bahurim. There a man from Saul’s extended family named Shimei son of Gera came out, yelling curses as he approached.
2SA 16:6 He threw stones at David and all of King David’s servants, as well as all the people and the soldiers who were on his right and on his left.
2SA 16:7 As he yelled curses, Shimei said, “Leave! Leave! You man of bloodshed, you wicked man!
2SA 16:8 The Lord has punished you for all the spilled blood of the house of Saul, in whose place you rule. Now the Lord has given the kingdom into the hand of your son Absalom. Disaster has overtaken you, for you are a man of bloodshed!”
2SA 16:9 Then Abishai son of Zeruiah said to the king, “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over and cut off his head!”
2SA 16:10 But the king said, “What do we have in common, you sons of Zeruiah? If he curses because the Lord has said to him, ‘Curse David!’, who can say to him, ‘Why have you done this?’”
2SA 16:11 Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants, “My own son, my very own flesh and blood, is trying to take my life. So also now this Benjaminite! Leave him alone so that he can curse, for the Lord has spoken to him.
2SA 16:12 Perhaps the Lord will notice my affliction and this day grant me good in place of his curse.”
2SA 16:13 So David and his men went on their way. But Shimei kept going along the side of the hill opposite him, yelling curses as he threw stones and dirt at them.
2SA 16:14 The king and all the people who were with him arrived exhausted at their destination, where David refreshed himself.
2SA 16:15 Now when Absalom and all the men of Israel arrived in Jerusalem, Ahithophel was with him.
2SA 16:16 When David’s friend Hushai the Arkite came to Absalom, Hushai said to him, “Long live the king! Long live the king!”
2SA 16:17 Absalom said to Hushai, “Do you call this loyalty to your friend? Why didn’t you go with your friend?”
2SA 16:18 Hushai replied to Absalom, “No, I will be loyal to the one whom the Lord, these people, and all the men of Israel have chosen.
2SA 16:19 Moreover, whom should I serve? Should it not be his son? Just as I served your father, so I will serve you.”
2SA 16:20 Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, “Give us your advice. What should we do?”
2SA 16:21 Ahithophel replied to Absalom, “Have sex with your father’s concubines whom he left to care for the palace. All Israel will hear that you have made yourself repulsive to your father. Then your followers will be motivated to support you.”
2SA 16:22 So they pitched a tent for Absalom on the roof, and Absalom had sex with his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel.
2SA 16:23 In those days Ahithophel’s advice was considered as valuable as a prophetic revelation. Both David and Absalom highly regarded the advice of Ahithophel.
2SA 17:1 Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Let me pick out twelve thousand men. Then I will go and pursue David this very night.
2SA 17:2 When I catch up with him he will be exhausted and worn out. I will rout him, and the entire army that is with him will flee. I will kill only the king
2SA 17:3 and will bring the entire army back to you. In exchange for the life of the man you are seeking, you will get back everyone. The entire army will return unharmed.”
2SA 17:4 This seemed like a good idea to Absalom and to all the leaders of Israel.
2SA 17:5 But Absalom said, “Call for Hushai the Arkite, and let’s hear what he has to say.”
2SA 17:6 So Hushai came to Absalom. Absalom said to him, “Here is what Ahithophel has advised. Should we follow his advice? If not, what would you recommend?”
2SA 17:7 Hushai replied to Absalom, “Ahithophel’s advice is not sound this time.”
2SA 17:8 Hushai went on to say, “You know your father and his men – they are soldiers and are as dangerous as a bear out in the wild that has been robbed of her cubs. Your father is an experienced soldier; he will not stay overnight with the army.
2SA 17:9 At this very moment he is hiding out in one of the caves or in some other similar place. If it should turn out that he attacks our troops first, whoever hears about it will say, ‘Absalom’s army has been slaughtered!’
2SA 17:10 If that happens even the bravest soldier – one who is lion-hearted – will virtually melt away. For all Israel knows that your father is a warrior and that those who are with him are brave.
2SA 17:11 My advice therefore is this: Let all Israel from Dan to Beer Sheba – in number like the sand by the sea! – be mustered to you, and you lead them personally into battle.
2SA 17:12 We will come against him wherever he happens to be found. We will descend on him like the dew falls on the ground. Neither he nor any of the men who are with him will be spared alive – not one of them!
2SA 17:13 If he regroups in a city, all Israel will take up ropes to that city and drag it down to the valley, so that not a single pebble will be left there!”
2SA 17:14 Then Absalom and all the men of Israel said, “The advice of Hushai the Arkite sounds better than the advice of Ahithophel.” Now the Lord had decided to frustrate the sound advice of Ahithophel, so that the Lord could bring disaster on Absalom.
2SA 17:15 Then Hushai reported to Zadok and Abiathar the priests, “Here is what Ahithophel has advised Absalom and the leaders of Israel to do, and here is what I have advised.
2SA 17:16 Now send word quickly to David and warn him, “Don’t spend the night at the fords of the desert tonight. Instead, be sure you cross over, or else the king and everyone who is with him may be overwhelmed.”
2SA 17:17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying in En Rogel. A female servant would go and inform them, and they would then go and inform King David. It was not advisable for them to be seen going into the city.
2SA 17:18 But a young man saw them on one occasion and informed Absalom. So the two of them quickly departed and went to the house of a man in Bahurim. There was a well in his courtyard, and they got down in it.
2SA 17:19 His wife then took the covering and spread it over the top of the well and scattered some grain over it. No one was aware of what she had done.
2SA 17:20 When the servants of Absalom approached the woman at her home, they asked, “Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?” The woman replied to them, “They crossed over the stream.” Absalom’s men searched but did not find them, so they returned to Jerusalem.
2SA 17:21 After the men had left, Ahimaaz and Jonathan climbed out of the well. Then they left and informed King David. They advised David, “Get up and cross the stream quickly, for Ahithophel has devised a plan to catch you.”
2SA 17:22 So David and all the people who were with him got up and crossed the Jordan River. By dawn there was not one person left who had not crossed the Jordan.
2SA 17:23 When Ahithophel realized that his advice had not been followed, he saddled his donkey and returned to his house in his hometown. After setting his household in order, he hanged himself. So he died and was buried in the grave of his father.
2SA 17:24 Meanwhile David had gone to Mahanaim, while Absalom and all the men of Israel had crossed the Jordan River.
2SA 17:25 Absalom had made Amasa general in command of the army in place of Joab. (Now Amasa was the son of an Israelite man named Jether, who had married Abigail the daughter of Nahash and sister of Zeruiah, Joab’s mother.)
2SA 17:26 The army of Israel and Absalom camped in the land of Gilead.
2SA 17:27 When David came to Mahanaim, Shobi the son of Nahash from Rabbah of the Ammonites, Makir the son of Ammiel from Lo Debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim
2SA 17:28 brought bedding, basins, and pottery utensils. They also brought food for David and all who were with him, including wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, beans, lentils,
2SA 17:29 honey, curds, flocks, and cheese. For they said, “The people are no doubt hungry, tired, and thirsty there in the desert.”
2SA 18:1 David assembled the army that was with him. He appointed leaders of thousands and leaders of hundreds.
2SA 18:2 David then sent out the army – a third under the leadership of Joab, a third under the leadership of Joab’s brother Abishai son of Zeruiah, and a third under the leadership of Ittai the Gittite. The king said to the troops, “I too will indeed march out with you.”
2SA 18:3 But the soldiers replied, “You should not do this! For if we should have to make a rapid retreat, they won’t be too concerned about us. Even if half of us should die, they won’t be too concerned about us. But you are like ten thousand of us! So it is better if you remain in the city for support.”
2SA 18:4 Then the king said to them, “I will do whatever seems best to you.” So the king stayed beside the city gate, while all the army marched out by hundreds and by thousands.
2SA 18:5 The king gave this order to Joab, Abishai, and Ittai: “For my sake deal gently with the young man Absalom.” Now the entire army was listening when the king gave all the leaders this order concerning Absalom.
2SA 18:6 Then the army marched out to the field to fight against Israel. The battle took place in the forest of Ephraim.
2SA 18:7 The army of Israel was defeated there by David’s men. The slaughter there was great that day – 20,000 soldiers were killed.
2SA 18:8 The battle there was spread out over the whole area, and the forest consumed more soldiers than the sword devoured that day.
2SA 18:9 Then Absalom happened to come across David’s men. Now as Absalom was riding on his mule, it went under the branches of a large oak tree. His head got caught in the oak and he was suspended in midair, while the mule he had been riding kept going.
2SA 18:10 When one of the men saw this, he reported it to Joab saying, “I saw Absalom hanging in an oak tree.
2SA 18:11 Joab replied to the man who was telling him this, “What! You saw this? Why didn’t you strike him down right on the spot? I would have given you ten pieces of silver and a commemorative belt!”
2SA 18:12 The man replied to Joab, “Even if I were receiving a thousand pieces of silver, I would not strike the king’s son! In our very presence the king gave this order to you and Abishai and Ittai, ‘Protect the young man Absalom for my sake.’
2SA 18:13 If I had acted at risk of my own life – and nothing is hidden from the king! – you would have abandoned me.”
2SA 18:14 Joab replied, “I will not wait around like this for you!” He took three spears in his hand and thrust them into the middle of Absalom while he was still alive in the middle of the oak tree.
2SA 18:15 Then ten soldiers who were Joab’s armor bearers struck Absalom and finished him off.
2SA 18:16 Then Joab blew the trumpet and the army turned back from chasing Israel, for Joab had called for the army to halt.
2SA 18:17 They took Absalom, threw him into a large pit in the forest, and stacked a huge pile of stones over him. In the meantime all the Israelite soldiers fled to their homes.
2SA 18:18 Prior to this Absalom had set up a monument and dedicated it to himself in the King’s Valley, reasoning “I have no son who will carry on my name.” He named the monument after himself, and to this day it is known as Absalom’s Memorial.
2SA 18:19 Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said, “Let me run and give the king the good news that the Lord has vindicated him before his enemies.”
2SA 18:20 But Joab said to him, “You will not be a bearer of good news today. You will bear good news some other day, but not today, for the king’s son is dead.”
2SA 18:21 Then Joab said to the Cushite, “Go and tell the king what you have seen.” After bowing to Joab, the Cushite ran off.
2SA 18:22 Ahimaaz the son of Zadok again spoke to Joab, “Whatever happens, let me go after the Cushite.” But Joab said, “Why is it that you want to go, my son? You have no good news that will bring you a reward.”
2SA 18:23 But he said, “Whatever happens, I want to go!” So Joab said to him, “Then go!” So Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Jordan plain, and he passed the Cushite.
2SA 18:24 Now David was sitting between the inner and outer gates, and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate at the wall. When he looked, he saw a man running by himself.
2SA 18:25 So the watchman called out and informed the king. The king said, “If he is by himself, he brings good news.” The runner came ever closer.
2SA 18:26 Then the watchman saw another man running. The watchman called out to the gatekeeper, “There is another man running by himself.” The king said, “This one also is bringing good news.”
2SA 18:27 The watchman said, “It appears to me that the first runner is Ahimaaz son of Zadok.” The king said, “He is a good man, and he comes with good news.”
2SA 18:28 Then Ahimaaz called out and said to the king, “Greetings!” He bowed down before the king with his face toward the ground and said, “May the Lord your God be praised because he has defeated the men who opposed my lord the king!”
2SA 18:29 The king replied, “How is the young man Absalom?” Ahimaaz replied, “I saw a great deal of confusion when Joab was sending the king’s servant and me, your servant, but I don’t know what it was all about.”
2SA 18:30 The king said, “Turn aside and take your place here.” So he turned aside and waited.
2SA 18:31 Then the Cushite arrived and said, “May my lord the king now receive the good news! The Lord has vindicated you today and delivered you from the hand of all who have rebelled against you!”
2SA 18:32 The king asked the Cushite, “How is the young man Absalom?” The Cushite replied, “May the enemies of my lord the king and all who have plotted against you be like that young man!”
2SA 18:33 The king then became very upset. He went up to the upper room over the gate and wept. As he went he said, “My son, Absalom! My son, my son, Absalom! If only I could have died in your place! Absalom, my son, my son!”
2SA 19:1 Joab was told, “The king is weeping and mourning over Absalom.”
2SA 19:2 So the victory of that day was turned to mourning as far as all the people were concerned. For the people heard on that day, “The king is grieved over his son.”
2SA 19:3 That day the people stole away to go to the city the way people who are embarrassed steal away in fleeing from battle.
2SA 19:4 The king covered his face and cried out loudly, “My son, Absalom! Absalom, my son, my son!”
2SA 19:5 So Joab visited the king at his home. He said, “Today you have embarrassed all your servants who have saved your life this day, as well as the lives of your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your concubines.
2SA 19:6 You seem to love your enemies and hate your friends! For you have as much as declared today that leaders and servants don’t matter to you. I realize now that if Absalom were alive and all of us were dead today, it would be all right with you.
2SA 19:7 So get up now and go out and give some encouragement to your servants. For I swear by the Lord that if you don’t go out there, not a single man will stay here with you tonight! This disaster will be worse for you than any disaster that has overtaken you from your youth right to the present time!”
2SA 19:8 So the king got up and sat at the city gate. When all the people were informed that the king was sitting at the city gate, they all came before him. But the Israelite soldiers had all fled to their own homes.
2SA 19:9 All the people throughout all the tribes of Israel were arguing among themselves saying, “The king delivered us from the hand of our enemies. He rescued us from the hand of the Philistines, but now he has fled from the land because of Absalom.
2SA 19:10 But Absalom, whom we anointed as our king, has died in battle. So now why do you hesitate to bring the king back?”
2SA 19:11 Then King David sent a message to Zadok and Abiathar the priests saying, “Tell the elders of Judah, ‘Why should you delay any further in bringing the king back to his palace, when everything Israel is saying has come to the king’s attention.
2SA 19:12 You are my brothers – my very own flesh and blood! Why should you delay any further in bringing the king back?’
2SA 19:13 Say to Amasa, ‘Are you not my flesh and blood? God will punish me severely, if from this time on you are not the commander of my army in place of Joab!’”
2SA 19:14 He won over the hearts of all the men of Judah as though they were one man. Then they sent word to the king saying, “Return, you and all your servants as well.”
2SA 19:15 So the king returned and came to the Jordan River. Now the people of Judah had come to Gilgal to meet the king and to help him cross the Jordan.
2SA 19:16 Shimei son of Gera the Benjaminite from Bahurim came down quickly with the men of Judah to meet King David.
2SA 19:17 There were a thousand men from Benjamin with him, along with Ziba the servant of Saul’s household, and with him his fifteen sons and twenty servants. They hurriedly crossed the Jordan within sight of the king.
2SA 19:18 They crossed at the ford in order to help the king’s household cross and to do whatever he thought appropriate. Now after he had crossed the Jordan, Shimei son of Gera threw himself down before the king.
2SA 19:19 He said to the king, “Don’t think badly of me, my lord, and don’t recall the sin of your servant on the day when you, my lord the king, left Jerusalem! Please don’t call it to mind!
2SA 19:20 For I, your servant, know that I sinned, and I have come today as the first of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king.”
2SA 19:21 Abishai son of Zeruiah replied, “For this should not Shimei be put to death? After all, he cursed the Lord’s anointed!”
2SA 19:22 But David said, “What do we have in common, you sons of Zeruiah? You are like my enemy today! Should anyone be put to death in Israel today? Don’t you realize that today I am king over Israel?”
2SA 19:23 The king said to Shimei, “You won’t die.” The king vowed an oath concerning this.
2SA 19:24 Now Mephibosheth, Saul’s grandson, came down to meet the king. From the day the king had left until the day he safely returned, Mephibosheth had not cared for his feet nor trimmed his mustache nor washed his clothes.
2SA 19:25 When he came from Jerusalem to meet the king, the king asked him, “Why didn’t you go with me, Mephibosheth?”
2SA 19:26 He replied, “My lord the king, my servant deceived me! I said, ‘Let me get my donkey saddled so that I can ride on it and go with the king,’ for I am lame.
2SA 19:27 But my servant has slandered me to my lord the king. But my lord the king is like an angel of God. Do whatever seems appropriate to you.
2SA 19:28 After all, there was no one in the entire house of my grandfather who did not deserve death from my lord the king. But instead you allowed me to eat at your own table! What further claim do I have to ask the king for anything?”
2SA 19:29 Then the king replied to him, “Why should you continue speaking like this? You and Ziba will inherit the field together.”
2SA 19:30 Mephibosheth said to the king, “Let him have the whole thing! My lord the king has returned safely to his house!”
2SA 19:31 Now when Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim, he crossed the Jordan with the king so he could send him on his way from there.
2SA 19:32 But Barzillai was very old – eighty years old, in fact – and he had taken care of the king when he stayed in Mahanaim, for he was a very rich man.
2SA 19:33 So the king said to Barzillai, “Cross over with me, and I will take care of you while you are with me in Jerusalem.”
2SA 19:34 Barzillai replied to the king, “How many days do I have left to my life, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?
2SA 19:35 I am presently eighty years old. Am I able to discern good and bad? Can I taste what I eat and drink? Am I still able to hear the voices of male and female singers? Why should I continue to be a burden to my lord the king?
2SA 19:36 I will cross the Jordan with the king and go a short distance. Why should the king reward me in this way?
2SA 19:37 Let me return so that I may die in my own city near the grave of my father and my mother. But look, here is your servant Kimham. Let him cross over with my lord the king. Do for him whatever seems appropriate to you.”
2SA 19:38 The king replied, “Kimham will cross over with me, and I will do for him whatever I deem appropriate. And whatever you choose, I will do for you.”
2SA 19:39 So all the people crossed the Jordan, as did the king. After the king had kissed him and blessed him, Barzillai returned to his home.
2SA 19:40 When the king crossed over to Gilgal, Kimham crossed over with him. Now all the soldiers of Judah along with half of the soldiers of Israel had helped the king cross over.
2SA 19:41 Then all the men of Israel began coming to the king. They asked the king, “Why did our brothers, the men of Judah, sneak the king away and help the king and his household cross the Jordan – and not only him but all of David’s men as well?”
2SA 19:42 All the men of Judah replied to the men of Israel, “Because the king is our close relative! Why are you so upset about this? Have we eaten at the king’s expense? Or have we misappropriated anything for our own use?”
2SA 19:43 The men of Israel replied to the men of Judah, “We have ten shares in the king, and we have a greater claim on David than you do! Why do you want to curse us? Weren’t we the first to suggest bringing back our king?” But the comments of the men of Judah were more severe than those of the men of Israel.
2SA 20:1 Now a wicked man named Sheba son of Bicri, a Benjaminite, happened to be there. He blew the trumpet and said, “We have no share in David; we have no inheritance in this son of Jesse! Every man go home, O Israel!”
2SA 20:2 So all the men of Israel deserted David and followed Sheba son of Bicri. But the men of Judah stuck by their king all the way from the Jordan River to Jerusalem.
2SA 20:3 Then David went to his palace in Jerusalem. The king took the ten concubines he had left to care for the palace and placed them under confinement. Though he provided for their needs, he did not have sexual relations with them. They remained in confinement until the day they died, living out the rest of their lives as widows.
2SA 20:4 Then the king said to Amasa, “Call the men of Judah together for me in three days, and you be present here with them too.”
2SA 20:5 So Amasa went out to call Judah together. But in doing so he took longer than the time that the king had allotted him.
2SA 20:6 Then David said to Abishai, “Now Sheba son of Bicri will cause greater disaster for us than Absalom did! Take your lord’s servants and pursue him. Otherwise he will secure fortified cities for himself and get away from us.”
2SA 20:7 So Joab’s men, accompanied by the Kerethites, the Pelethites, and all the warriors, left Jerusalem to pursue Sheba son of Bicri.
2SA 20:8 When they were near the big rock that is in Gibeon, Amasa came to them. Now Joab was dressed in military attire and had a dagger in its sheath belted to his waist. When he advanced, it fell out.
2SA 20:9 Joab said to Amasa, “How are you, my brother?” With his right hand Joab took hold of Amasa’s beard as if to greet him with a kiss.
2SA 20:10 Amasa did not protect himself from the knife in Joab’s other hand, and Joab stabbed him in the abdomen, causing Amasa’s intestines to spill out on the ground. There was no need to stab him again; the first blow was fatal. Then Joab and his brother Abishai pursued Sheba son of Bicri.
2SA 20:11 One of Joab’s soldiers who stood over Amasa said, “Whoever is for Joab and whoever is for David, follow Joab!”
2SA 20:12 Amasa was squirming in his own blood in the middle of the path, and this man had noticed that all the soldiers stopped. Having noticed that everyone who came across Amasa stopped, the man pulled him away from the path and into the field and threw a garment over him.
2SA 20:13 Once he had removed Amasa from the path, everyone followed Joab to pursue Sheba son of Bicri.
2SA 20:14 Sheba traveled through all the tribes of Israel to Abel of Beth Maacah and all the Berite region. When they had assembled, they too joined him.
2SA 20:15 So Joab’s men came and laid siege against him in Abel of Beth Maacah. They prepared a siege ramp outside the city which stood against its outer rampart. As all of Joab’s soldiers were trying to break through the wall so that it would collapse,
2SA 20:16 a wise woman called out from the city, “Listen up! Listen up! Tell Joab, ‘Come near so that I may speak to you.’”
2SA 20:17 When he approached her, the woman asked, “Are you Joab?” He replied, “I am.” She said to him, “Listen to the words of your servant.” He said, “Go ahead. I’m listening.”
2SA 20:18 She said, “In the past they would always say, ‘Let them inquire in Abel,’ and that is how they settled things.
2SA 20:19 I represent the peaceful and the faithful in Israel. You are attempting to destroy an important city in Israel. Why should you swallow up the Lord’s inheritance?”
2SA 20:20 Joab answered, “Get serious! I don’t want to swallow up or destroy anything!
2SA 20:21 That’s not the way things are. There is a man from the hill country of Ephraim named Sheba son of Bicri. He has rebelled against King David. Give me just this one man, and I will leave the city.” The woman said to Joab, “This very minute his head will be thrown over the wall to you!”
2SA 20:22 Then the woman went to all the people with her wise advice and they cut off Sheba’s head and threw it out to Joab. Joab blew the trumpet, and his men dispersed from the city, each going to his own home. Joab returned to the king in Jerusalem.
2SA 20:23 Now Joab was the general in command of all the army of Israel. Benaiah the son of Jehoida was over the Kerethites and the Perethites.
2SA 20:24 Adoniram was supervisor of the work crews. Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the secretary.
2SA 20:25 Sheva was the scribe, and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests.
2SA 20:26 Ira the Jairite was David’s personal priest.
2SA 21:1 During David’s reign there was a famine for three consecutive years. So David inquired of the Lord. The Lord said, “It is because of Saul and his bloodstained family, because he murdered the Gibeonites.”
2SA 21:2 So the king summoned the Gibeonites and spoke with them. (Now the Gibeonites were not descendants of Israel; they were a remnant of the Amorites. The Israelites had made a promise to them, but Saul tried to kill them because of his zeal for the people of Israel and Judah.)
2SA 21:3 David said to the Gibeonites, “What can I do for you, and how can I make amends so that you will bless the Lord’s inheritance?”
2SA 21:4 The Gibeonites said to him, “We have no claim to silver or gold from Saul or from his family, nor would we be justified in putting to death anyone in Israel.” David asked, “What then are you asking me to do for you?”
2SA 21:5 They replied to the king, “As for this man who exterminated us and who schemed against us so that we were destroyed and left without status throughout all the borders of Israel –
2SA 21:6 let seven of his male descendants be turned over to us, and we will execute them before the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, who was the Lord’s chosen one.” The king replied, “I will turn them over.”
2SA 21:7 The king had mercy on Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, in light of the Lord’s oath that had been taken between David and Jonathan son of Saul.
2SA 21:8 So the king took Armoni and Mephibosheth, the two sons of Aiah’s daughter Rizpah whom she had born to Saul, and the five sons of Saul’s daughter Merab whom she had born to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite.
2SA 21:9 He turned them over to the Gibeonites, and they executed them on a hill before the Lord. The seven of them died together; they were put to death during harvest time – during the first days of the beginning of the barley harvest.
2SA 21:10 Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth and spread it out for herself on a rock. From the beginning of the harvest until the rain fell on them, she did not allow the birds of the air to feed on them by day, nor the wild animals by night.
2SA 21:11 When David was told what Rizpah daughter of Aiah, Saul’s concubine, had done,
2SA 21:12 he went and took the bones of Saul and of his son Jonathan from the leaders of Jabesh Gilead. (They had secretly taken them from the plaza at Beth Shan. It was there that Philistines publicly exposed their corpses after they had killed Saul at Gilboa.)
2SA 21:13 David brought the bones of Saul and of Jonathan his son from there; they also gathered up the bones of those who had been executed.
2SA 21:14 They buried the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan in the land of Benjamin at Zela in the grave of his father Kish. After they had done everything that the king had commanded, God responded to their prayers for the land.
2SA 21:15 Another battle was fought between the Philistines and Israel. So David went down with his soldiers and fought the Philistines. David became exhausted.
2SA 21:16 Now Ishbi-Benob, one of the descendants of Rapha, had a spear that weighed three hundred bronze shekels, and he was armed with a new weapon. He had said that he would kill David.
2SA 21:17 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah came to David’s aid, striking the Philistine down and killing him. Then David’s men took an oath saying, “You will not go out to battle with us again! You must not extinguish the lamp of Israel!”
2SA 21:18 Later there was another battle with the Philistines, this time in Gob. On that occasion Sibbekai the Hushathite killed Saph, who was one of the descendants of Rapha.
2SA 21:19 Yet another battle occurred with the Philistines in Gob. On that occasion Elhanan the son of Jair the Bethlehemite killed the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.
2SA 21:20 Yet another battle occurred in Gath. On that occasion there was a large man who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot, twenty-four in all! He too was a descendant of Rapha.
2SA 21:21 When he taunted Israel, Jonathan, the son of David’s brother Shimeah, killed him.
2SA 21:22 These four were the descendants of Rapha who lived in Gath; they were killed by David and his soldiers.
2SA 22:1 David sang to the Lord the words of this song when the Lord rescued him from the power of all his enemies, including Saul.
2SA 22:2 He said: “The Lord is my high ridge, my stronghold, my deliverer.
2SA 22:3 My God is my rocky summit where I take shelter, my shield, the horn that saves me, my stronghold, my refuge, my savior. You save me from violence!
2SA 22:4 I called to the Lord, who is worthy of praise, and I was delivered from my enemies.
2SA 22:5 The waves of death engulfed me; the currents of chaos overwhelmed me.
2SA 22:6 The ropes of Sheol tightened around me; the snares of death trapped me.
2SA 22:7 In my distress I called to the Lord; I called to my God. From his heavenly temple he heard my voice; he listened to my cry for help.
2SA 22:8 The earth heaved and shook; the foundations of the sky trembled. They heaved because he was angry.
2SA 22:9 Smoke ascended from his nose; fire devoured as it came from his mouth; he hurled down fiery coals.
2SA 22:10 He made the sky sink as he descended; a thick cloud was under his feet.
2SA 22:11 He mounted a winged angel and flew; he glided on the wings of the wind.
2SA 22:12 He shrouded himself in darkness, in thick rain clouds.
2SA 22:13 From the brightness in front of him came coals of fire.
2SA 22:14 The Lord thundered from the sky; the sovereign One shouted loudly.
2SA 22:15 He shot arrows and scattered them, lightning and routed them.
2SA 22:16 The depths of the sea were exposed; the inner regions of the world were uncovered by the Lord’s battle cry, by the powerful breath from his nose.
2SA 22:17 He reached down from above and grabbed me; he pulled me from the surging water.
2SA 22:18 He rescued me from my strong enemy, from those who hate me, for they were too strong for me.
2SA 22:19 They confronted me in my day of calamity, but the Lord helped me.
2SA 22:20 He brought me out into a wide open place; he delivered me because he was pleased with me.
2SA 22:21 The Lord repaid me for my godly deeds; he rewarded my blameless behavior.
2SA 22:22 For I have obeyed the Lord’s commands; I have not rebelled against my God.
2SA 22:23 For I am aware of all his regulations, and I do not reject his rules.
2SA 22:24 I was blameless before him; I kept myself from sinning.
2SA 22:25 The Lord rewarded me for my godly deeds; he took notice of my blameless behavior.
2SA 22:26 You prove to be loyal to one who is faithful; you prove to be trustworthy to one who is innocent.
2SA 22:27 You prove to be reliable to one who is blameless, but you prove to be deceptive to one who is perverse.
2SA 22:28 You deliver oppressed people, but you watch the proud and bring them down.
2SA 22:29 Indeed, you are my lamp, Lord. The Lord illumines the darkness around me.
2SA 22:30 Indeed, with your help I can charge against an army; by my God’s power I can jump over a wall.
2SA 22:31 The one true God acts in a faithful manner; the Lord’s promise is reliable; he is a shield to all who take shelter in him.
2SA 22:32 Indeed, who is God besides the Lord? Who is a protector besides our God?
2SA 22:33 The one true God is my mighty refuge; he removes the obstacles in my way.
2SA 22:34 He gives me the agility of a deer; he enables me to negotiate the rugged terrain.
2SA 22:35 He trains my hands for battle; my arms can bend even the strongest bow.
2SA 22:36 You give me your protective shield; your willingness to help enables me to prevail.
2SA 22:37 You widen my path; my feet do not slip.
2SA 22:38 I chase my enemies and destroy them; I do not turn back until I wipe them out.
2SA 22:39 I wipe them out and beat them to death; they cannot get up; they fall at my feet.
2SA 22:40 You give me strength for battle; you make my foes kneel before me.
2SA 22:41 You make my enemies retreat; I destroy those who hate me.
2SA 22:42 They cry out, but there is no one to help them; they cry out to the Lord, but he does not answer them.
2SA 22:43 I grind them as fine as the dust of the ground; I crush them and stomp on them like clay in the streets.
2SA 22:44 You rescue me from a hostile army; you preserve me as a leader of nations; people over whom I had no authority are now my subjects.
2SA 22:45 Foreigners are powerless before me; when they hear of my exploits, they submit to me.
2SA 22:46 Foreigners lose their courage; they shake with fear as they leave their strongholds.
2SA 22:47 The Lord is alive! My protector is praiseworthy! The God who delivers me is exalted as king!
2SA 22:48 The one true God completely vindicates me; he makes nations submit to me.
2SA 22:49 He delivers me from my enemies; you snatch me away from those who attack me; you rescue me from violent men.
2SA 22:50 So I will give you thanks, O Lord, before the nations! I will sing praises to you.
2SA 22:51 He gives his chosen king magnificent victories; he is faithful to his chosen ruler, to David and to his descendants forever!”
2SA 23:1 These are the final words of David: “The oracle of David son of Jesse, the oracle of the man raised up as the ruler chosen by the God of Jacob, Israel’s beloved singer of songs:
2SA 23:2 The Lord’s spirit spoke through me; his word was on my tongue.
2SA 23:3 The God of Israel spoke, the protector of Israel spoke to me. The one who rules fairly among men, the one who rules in the fear of God,
2SA 23:4 is like the light of morning when the sun comes up, a morning in which there are no clouds. He is like the brightness after rain that produces grass from the earth.
2SA 23:5 My dynasty is approved by God, for he has made a perpetual covenant with me, arranged in all its particulars and secured. He always delivers me, and brings all I desire to fruition.
2SA 23:6 But evil people are like thorns – all of them are tossed away, for they cannot be held in the hand.
2SA 23:7 The one who touches them must use an iron instrument or the wooden shaft of a spear. They are completely burned up right where they lie!”
2SA 23:8 These are the names of David’s warriors: Josheb-Basshebeth, a Tahkemonite, was head of the officers. He killed eight hundred men with his spear in one battle.
2SA 23:9 Next in command was Eleazar son of Dodo, the son of Ahohi. He was one of the three warriors who were with David when they defied the Philistines who were assembled there for battle. When the men of Israel retreated,
2SA 23:10 he stood his ground and fought the Philistines until his hand grew so tired that it seemed stuck to his sword. The Lord gave a great victory on that day. When the army returned to him, the only thing left to do was to plunder the corpses.
2SA 23:11 Next in command was Shammah son of Agee the Hararite. When the Philistines assembled at Lehi, where there happened to be an area of a field that was full of lentils, the army retreated before the Philistines.
2SA 23:12 But he made a stand in the middle of that area. He defended it and defeated the Philistines; the Lord gave them a great victory.
2SA 23:13 At the time of the harvest three of the thirty leaders went down to David at the cave of Adullam. A band of Philistines was camped in the valley of Rephaim.
2SA 23:14 David was in the stronghold at the time, while a Philistine garrison was in Bethlehem.
2SA 23:15 David was thirsty and said, “How I wish someone would give me some water to drink from the cistern in Bethlehem near the gate!”
2SA 23:16 So the three elite warriors broke through the Philistine forces and drew some water from the cistern in Bethlehem near the gate. They carried it back to David, but he refused to drink it. He poured it out as a drink offering to the Lord
2SA 23:17 and said, “O Lord, I will not do this! It is equivalent to the blood of the men who risked their lives by going.” So he refused to drink it. Such were the exploits of the three elite warriors.
2SA 23:18 Abishai son of Zeruiah, the brother of Joab, was head of the three. He killed three hundred men with his spear and gained fame among the three.
2SA 23:19 From the three he was given honor and he became their officer, even though he was not one of the three.
2SA 23:20 Benaiah son of Jehoida was a brave warrior from Kabzeel who performed great exploits. He struck down the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in a cistern on a snowy day.
2SA 23:21 He also killed an impressive-looking Egyptian. The Egyptian wielded a spear, while Benaiah attacked him with a club. He grabbed the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear.
2SA 23:22 Such were the exploits of Benaiah son of Jehoida, who gained fame among the three elite warriors.
2SA 23:23 He received honor from the thirty warriors, though he was not one of the three elite warriors. David put him in charge of his bodyguard.
2SA 23:24 Included with the thirty were the following: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo from Bethlehem,
2SA 23:25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
2SA 23:26 Helez the Paltite, Ira son of Ikkesh from Tekoa,
2SA 23:27 Abiezer the Anathothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
2SA 23:28 Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
2SA 23:29 Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai son of Ribai from Gibeah in Benjamin,
2SA 23:30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai from the wadis of Gaash,
2SA 23:31 Abi-Albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
2SA 23:32 Eliahba the Shaalbonite, the sons of Jashen, Jonathan
2SA 23:33 son of Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam son of Sharar the Hararite,
2SA 23:34 Eliphelet son of Ahasbai the Maacathite, Eliam son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
2SA 23:35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
2SA 23:36 Igal son of Nathan from Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
2SA 23:37 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite (the armor-bearer of Joab son of Zeruiah),
2SA 23:38 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite
2SA 23:39 and Uriah the Hittite. Altogether there were thirty-seven.
2SA 24:1 The Lord’s anger again raged against Israel, and he incited David against them, saying, “Go count Israel and Judah.”
2SA 24:2 The king told Joab, the general in command of his army, “Go through all the tribes of Israel from Dan to Beer Sheba and muster the army, so I may know the size of the army.”
2SA 24:3 Joab replied to the king, “May the Lord your God make the army a hundred times larger right before the eyes of my lord the king! But why does my master the king want to do this?”
2SA 24:4 But the king’s edict stood, despite the objections of Joab and the leaders of the army. So Joab and the leaders of the army left the king’s presence in order to muster the Israelite army.
2SA 24:5 They crossed the Jordan and camped at Aroer, on the south side of the city, at the wadi of Gad, near Jazer.
2SA 24:6 Then they went on to Gilead and to the region of Tahtim Hodshi, coming to Dan Jaan and on around to Sidon.
2SA 24:7 Then they went to the fortress of Tyre and all the cities of the Hivites and the Canaanites. Then they went on to the Negev of Judah, to Beer Sheba.
2SA 24:8 They went through all the land and after nine months and twenty days came back to Jerusalem.
2SA 24:9 Joab reported the number of warriors to the king. In Israel there were 800,000 sword-wielding warriors, and in Judah there were 500,000 soldiers.
2SA 24:10 David felt guilty after he had numbered the army. David said to the Lord, “I have sinned greatly by doing this! Now, O Lord, please remove the guilt of your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”
2SA 24:11 When David got up the next morning, the Lord had already spoken to Gad the prophet, David’s seer:
2SA 24:12 “Go, tell David, ‘This is what the Lord says: I am offering you three forms of judgment. Pick one of them and I will carry it out against you.’”
2SA 24:13 Gad went to David and told him, “Shall seven years of famine come upon your land? Or shall you flee for three months from your enemy with him in hot pursuit? Or shall there be three days of plague in your land? Now decide what I should tell the one who sent me.”
2SA 24:14 David said to Gad, “I am very upset! I prefer that we be attacked by the Lord, for his mercy is great; I do not want to be attacked by men!”
2SA 24:15 So the Lord sent a plague through Israel from the morning until the completion of the appointed time. Seventy thousand men died from Dan to Beer Sheba.
2SA 24:16 When the angel extended his hand to destroy Jerusalem, the Lord relented from his judgment. He told the angel who was killing the people, “That’s enough! Stop now!” (Now the Lord’s angel was near the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.)
2SA 24:17 When he saw the angel who was destroying the people, David said to the Lord, “Look, it is I who have sinned and done this evil thing! As for these sheep – what have they done? Attack me and my family.”
2SA 24:18 So Gad went to David that day and told him, “Go up and build an altar for the Lord on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.”
2SA 24:19 So David went up as Gad instructed him to do, according to the Lord’s instructions.
2SA 24:20 When Araunah looked out and saw the king and his servants approaching him, he went out and bowed to the king with his face to the ground.
2SA 24:21 Araunah said, “Why has my lord the king come to his servant?” David replied, “To buy from you the threshing floor so I can build an altar for the Lord, so that the plague may be removed from the people.”
2SA 24:22 Araunah told David, “My lord the king may take whatever he wishes and offer it. Look! Here are oxen for burnt offerings, and threshing sledges and harnesses for wood.
2SA 24:23 I, the servant of my lord the king, give it all to the king!” Araunah also told the king, “May the Lord your God show you favor!”
2SA 24:24 But the king said to Araunah, “No, I insist on buying it from you! I will not offer to the Lord my God burnt sacrifices that cost me nothing.” So David bought the threshing floor and the oxen for fifty pieces of silver.
2SA 24:25 Then David built an altar for the Lord there and offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings. And the Lord accepted prayers for the land, and the plague was removed from Israel.
1KI 1:1 King David was very old; even when they covered him with blankets, he could not get warm.
1KI 1:2 His servants advised him, “A young virgin must be found for our master, the king, to take care of the king’s needs and serve as his nurse. She can also sleep with you and keep our master, the king, warm.”
1KI 1:3 So they looked through all Israel for a beautiful young woman and found Abishag, a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.
1KI 1:4 The young woman was very beautiful; she became the king’s nurse and served him, but the king did not have sexual relations with her.
1KI 1:5 Now Adonijah, son of David and Haggith, was promoting himself, boasting, “I will be king!” He managed to acquire chariots and horsemen, as well as fifty men to serve as his royal guard.
1KI 1:6 (Now his father had never corrected him by saying, “Why do you do such things?” He was also very handsome and had been born right after Absalom. )
1KI 1:7 He collaborated with Joab son of Zeruiah and with Abiathar the priest, and they supported him.
1KI 1:8 But Zadok the priest, Benaiah son of Jehoiada, Nathan the prophet, Shimei, Rei, and David’s elite warriors did not ally themselves with Adonijah.
1KI 1:9 Adonijah sacrificed sheep, cattle, and fattened steers at the Stone of Zoheleth near En Rogel. He invited all his brothers, the king’s sons, as well as all the men of Judah, the king’s servants.
1KI 1:10 But he did not invite Nathan the prophet, Benaiah, the elite warriors, or his brother Solomon.
1KI 1:11 Nathan said to Bathsheba, Solomon’s mother, “Has it been reported to you that Haggith’s son Adonijah has become king behind our master David’s back?
1KI 1:12 Now let me give you some advice as to how you can save your life and your son Solomon’s life.
1KI 1:13 Visit King David and say to him, ‘My master, O king, did you not solemnly promise your servant, “Surely your son Solomon will be king after me; he will sit on my throne”? So why has Adonijah become king?’
1KI 1:14 While you are still there speaking to the king, I will arrive and verify your report.”
1KI 1:15 So Bathsheba visited the king in his private quarters. (The king was very old, and Abishag the Shunammite was serving the king.)
1KI 1:16 Bathsheba bowed down on the floor before the king. The king said, “What do you want?”
1KI 1:17 She replied to him, “My master, you swore an oath to your servant by the Lord your God, ‘Solomon your son will be king after me and he will sit on my throne.’
1KI 1:18 But now, look, Adonijah has become king! But you, my master the king, are not even aware of it!
1KI 1:19 He has sacrificed many cattle, steers, and sheep and has invited all the king’s sons, Abiathar the priest, and Joab, the commander of the army, but he has not invited your servant Solomon.
1KI 1:20 Now, my master, O king, all Israel is watching anxiously to see who is named to succeed my master the king on the throne.
1KI 1:21 If a decision is not made, when my master the king is buried with his ancestors, my son Solomon and I will be considered state criminals.”
1KI 1:22 Just then, while she was still speaking to the king, Nathan the prophet arrived.
1KI 1:23 The king was told, “Nathan the prophet is here.” Nathan entered and bowed before the king with his face to the floor.
1KI 1:24 Nathan said, “My master, O king, did you announce, ‘Adonijah will be king after me; he will sit on my throne’?
1KI 1:25 For today he has gone down and sacrificed many cattle, steers, and sheep and has invited all the king’s sons, the army commanders, and Abiathar the priest. At this moment they are having a feast in his presence, and they have declared, ‘Long live King Adonijah!’
1KI 1:26 But he did not invite me – your servant – or Zadok the priest, or Benaiah son of Jehoiada, or your servant Solomon.
1KI 1:27 Has my master the king authorized this without informing your servants who should succeed my master the king on his throne?”
1KI 1:28 King David responded, “Summon Bathsheba!” She came and stood before the king.
1KI 1:29 The king swore an oath: “As certainly as the Lord lives (he who has rescued me from every danger),
1KI 1:30 I will keep today the oath I swore to you by the Lord God of Israel: ‘Surely Solomon your son will be king after me; he will sit in my place on my throne.’”
1KI 1:31 Bathsheba bowed down to the king with her face to the floor and said, “May my master, King David, live forever!”
1KI 1:32 King David said, “Summon Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada.” They came before the king,
1KI 1:33 and he told them, “Take your master’s servants with you, put my son Solomon on my mule, and lead him down to Gihon.
1KI 1:34 There Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet will anoint him king over Israel; then blow the trumpet and declare, ‘Long live King Solomon!’
1KI 1:35 Then follow him up as he comes and sits on my throne. He will be king in my place; I have decreed that he will be ruler over Israel and Judah.”
1KI 1:36 Benaiah son of Jehoiada responded to the king: “So be it! May the Lord God of my master the king confirm it!
1KI 1:37 As the Lord is with my master the king, so may he be with Solomon, and may he make him an even greater king than my master King David!”
1KI 1:38 So Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah son of Jehoiada, the Kerethites, and the Pelethites went down, put Solomon on King David’s mule, and led him to Gihon.
1KI 1:39 Zadok the priest took a horn filled with olive oil from the tent and poured it on Solomon; the trumpet was blown and all the people declared, “Long live King Solomon!”
1KI 1:40 All the people followed him up, playing flutes and celebrating so loudly they made the ground shake.
1KI 1:41 Now Adonijah and all his guests heard the commotion just as they had finished eating. When Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he asked, “Why is there such a noisy commotion in the city?”
1KI 1:42 As he was still speaking, Jonathan son of Abiathar the priest arrived. Adonijah said, “Come in, for an important man like you must be bringing good news.”
1KI 1:43 Jonathan replied to Adonijah: “No! Our master King David has made Solomon king.
1KI 1:44 The king sent with him Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah son of Jehoiada, the Kerethites, and the Pelethites and they put him on the king’s mule.
1KI 1:45 Then Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anointed him king in Gihon. They went up from there rejoicing, and the city is in an uproar. That is the sound you hear.
1KI 1:46 Furthermore, Solomon has assumed the royal throne.
1KI 1:47 The king’s servants have even come to congratulate our master King David, saying, ‘May your God make Solomon more famous than you and make him an even greater king than you!’ Then the king leaned on the bed
1KI 1:48 and said this: ‘The Lord God of Israel is worthy of praise because today he has placed a successor on my throne and allowed me to see it.’”
1KI 1:49 All of Adonijah’s guests panicked; they jumped up and rushed off their separate ways.
1KI 1:50 Adonijah feared Solomon, so he got up and went and grabbed hold of the horns of the altar.
1KI 1:51 Solomon was told, “Look, Adonijah fears you; see, he has taken hold of the horns of the altar, saying, ‘May King Solomon solemnly promise me today that he will not kill his servant with the sword.’”
1KI 1:52 Solomon said, “If he is a loyal subject, not a hair of his head will be harmed, but if he is found to be a traitor, he will die.”
1KI 1:53 King Solomon sent men to bring him down from the altar. He came and bowed down to King Solomon, and Solomon told him, “Go home.”
1KI 2:1 When David was close to death, he told Solomon his son:
1KI 2:2 “I am about to die. Be strong and become a man!
1KI 2:3 Do the job the Lord your God has assigned you by following his instructions and obeying his rules, commandments, regulations, and laws as written in the law of Moses. Then you will succeed in all you do and seek to accomplish,
1KI 2:4 and the Lord will fulfill his promise to me, ‘If your descendants watch their step and live faithfully in my presence with all their heart and being, then,’ he promised, ‘you will not fail to have a successor on the throne of Israel.’
1KI 2:5 “You know what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me – how he murdered two commanders of the Israelite armies, Abner son of Ner and Amasa son of Jether. During peacetime he struck them down like he would in battle; when he shed their blood as if in battle, he stained his own belt and the sandals on his feet.
1KI 2:6 Do to him what you think is appropriate, but don’t let him live long and die a peaceful death.
1KI 2:7 “Treat fairly the sons of Barzillai of Gilead and provide for their needs, because they helped me when I had to flee from your brother Absalom.
1KI 2:8 “Note well, you still have to contend with Shimei son of Gera, the Benjaminite from Bahurim, who tried to call down upon me a horrible judgment when I went to Mahanaim. He came down and met me at the Jordan, and I solemnly promised him by the Lord, ‘I will not strike you down with the sword.’
1KI 2:9 But now don’t treat him as if he were innocent. You are a wise man and you know how to handle him; make sure he has a bloody death.”
1KI 2:10 Then David passed away and was buried in the city of David.
1KI 2:11 David reigned over Israel forty years; he reigned in Hebron seven years, and in Jerusalem thirty-three years.
1KI 2:12 Solomon sat on his father David’s throne, and his royal authority was firmly solidified.
1KI 2:13 Haggith’s son Adonijah visited Bathsheba, Solomon’s mother. She asked, “Do you come in peace?” He answered, “Yes.”
1KI 2:14 He added, “I have something to say to you.” She replied, “Speak.”
1KI 2:15 He said, “You know that the kingdom was mine and all Israel considered me king. But then the kingdom was given to my brother, for the Lord decided it should be his.
1KI 2:16 Now I’d like to ask you for just one thing. Please don’t refuse me.” She said, “Go ahead and ask.”
1KI 2:17 He said, “Please ask King Solomon if he would give me Abishag the Shunammite as a wife, for he won’t refuse you.”
1KI 2:18 Bathsheba replied, “That’s fine, I’ll speak to the king on your behalf.”
1KI 2:19 So Bathsheba visited King Solomon to speak to him on Adonijah’s behalf. The king got up to greet her, bowed to her, and then sat on his throne. He ordered a throne to be brought for the king’s mother, and she sat at his right hand.
1KI 2:20 She said, “I would like to ask you for just one small favor. Please don’t refuse me.” He said, “Go ahead and ask, my mother, for I would not refuse you.”
1KI 2:21 She said, “Allow Abishag the Shunammite to be given to your brother Adonijah as a wife.”
1KI 2:22 King Solomon answered his mother, “Why just request Abishag the Shunammite for him? Since he is my older brother, you should also request the kingdom for him, for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab son of Zeruiah!”
1KI 2:23 King Solomon then swore an oath by the Lord, “May God judge me severely, if Adonijah does not pay for this request with his life!
1KI 2:24 Now, as certainly as the Lord lives (he who made me secure, allowed me to sit on my father David’s throne, and established a dynasty for me as he promised), Adonijah will be executed today!”
1KI 2:25 King Solomon then sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and he killed Adonijah.
1KI 2:26 The king then told Abiathar the priest, “Go back to your property in Anathoth. You deserve to die, but today I will not kill you because you did carry the ark of the sovereign Lord before my father David and you suffered with my father through all his difficult times.”
1KI 2:27 Solomon dismissed Abiathar from his position as priest of the Lord, fulfilling the decree of judgment the Lord made in Shiloh against the family of Eli.
1KI 2:28 When the news reached Joab (for Joab had supported Adonijah, although he had not supported Absalom), he ran to the tent of the Lord and grabbed hold of the horns of the altar.
1KI 2:29 When King Solomon heard that Joab had run to the tent of the Lord and was right there beside the altar, he ordered Benaiah son of Jehoiada, “Go, strike him down.”
1KI 2:30 When Benaiah arrived at the tent of the Lord, he said to him, “The king says, ‘Come out!’” But he replied, “No, I will die here!” So Benaiah sent word to the king and reported Joab’s reply.
1KI 2:31 The king told him, “Do as he said! Strike him down and bury him. Take away from me and from my father’s family the guilt of Joab’s murderous, bloody deeds.
1KI 2:32 May the Lord punish him for the blood he shed; behind my father David’s back he struck down and murdered with the sword two men who were more innocent and morally upright than he – Abner son of Ner, commander of Israel’s army, and Amasa son of Jether, commander of Judah’s army.
1KI 2:33 May Joab and his descendants be perpetually guilty of their shed blood, but may the Lord give perpetual peace to David, his descendants, his family, and his dynasty.”
1KI 2:34 So Benaiah son of Jehoiada went up and executed Joab; he was buried at his home in the wilderness.
1KI 2:35 The king appointed Benaiah son of Jehoiada to take his place at the head of the army, and the king appointed Zadok the priest to take Abiathar’s place.
1KI 2:36 Next the king summoned Shimei and told him, “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem and live there – but you may not leave there to go anywhere!
1KI 2:37 If you ever do leave and cross the Kidron Valley, know for sure that you will certainly die! You will be responsible for your own death.”
1KI 2:38 Shimei said to the king, “My master the king’s proposal is acceptable. Your servant will do as you say.” So Shimei lived in Jerusalem for a long time.
1KI 2:39 Three years later two of Shimei’s servants ran away to King Achish son of Maacah of Gath. Shimei was told, “Look, your servants are in Gath.”
1KI 2:40 So Shimei got up, saddled his donkey, and went to Achish at Gath to find his servants; Shimei went and brought back his servants from Gath.
1KI 2:41 When Solomon was told that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and had then returned,
1KI 2:42 the king summoned Shimei and said to him, “You will recall that I made you take an oath by the Lord, and I solemnly warned you, ‘If you ever leave and go anywhere, know for sure that you will certainly die.’ You said to me, ‘The proposal is acceptable; I agree to it.’
1KI 2:43 Why then have you broken the oath you made before the Lord and disobeyed the order I gave you?”
1KI 2:44 Then the king said to Shimei, “You are well aware of the way you mistreated my father David. The Lord will punish you for what you did.
1KI 2:45 But King Solomon will be empowered and David’s dynasty will endure permanently before the Lord.”
1KI 2:46 The king then gave the order to Benaiah son of Jehoiada who went and executed Shimei. So Solomon took firm control of the kingdom.
1KI 3:1 Solomon made an alliance by marriage with Pharaoh, king of Egypt; he married Pharaoh’s daughter. He brought her to the City of David until he could finish building his residence and the temple of the Lord and the wall around Jerusalem.
1KI 3:2 Now the people were offering sacrifices at the high places, because in those days a temple had not yet been built to honor the Lord.
1KI 3:3 Solomon demonstrated his loyalty to the Lord by following the practices of his father David, except that he offered sacrifices and burned incense on the high places.
1KI 3:4 The king went to Gibeon to offer sacrifices, for it had the most prominent of the high places. Solomon would offer up a thousand burnt sacrifices on the altar there.
1KI 3:5 One night in Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream. God said, “Tell me what I should give you.”
1KI 3:6 Solomon replied, “You demonstrated great loyalty to your servant, my father David, as he served you faithfully, properly, and sincerely. You have maintained this great loyalty to this day by allowing his son to sit on his throne.
1KI 3:7 Now, O Lord my God, you have made your servant king in my father David’s place, even though I am only a young man and am inexperienced.
1KI 3:8 Your servant stands among your chosen people; they are a great nation that is too numerous to count or number.
1KI 3:9 So give your servant a discerning mind so he can make judicial decisions for your people and distinguish right from wrong. Otherwise no one is able to make judicial decisions for this great nation of yours.”
1KI 3:10 The Lord was pleased that Solomon made this request.
1KI 3:11 God said to him, “Because you asked for the ability to make wise judicial decisions, and not for long life, or riches, or vengeance on your enemies,
1KI 3:12 I grant your request, and give you a wise and discerning mind superior to that of anyone who has preceded or will succeed you.
1KI 3:13 Furthermore, I am giving you what you did not request – riches and honor so that you will be the greatest king of your generation.
1KI 3:14 If you follow my instructions by obeying my rules and regulations, just as your father David did, then I will grant you long life.”
1KI 3:15 Solomon then woke up and realized it was a dream. He went to Jerusalem, stood before the ark of the Lord’s covenant, offered up burnt sacrifices, presented peace offerings, and held a feast for all his servants.
1KI 3:16 Then two prostitutes came to the king and stood before him.
1KI 3:17 One of the women said, “My master, this woman and I live in the same house. I had a baby while she was with me in the house.
1KI 3:18 Then three days after I had my baby, this woman also had a baby. We were alone; there was no one else in the house except the two of us.
1KI 3:19 This woman’s child suffocated during the night when she rolled on top of him.
1KI 3:20 She got up in the middle of the night and took my son from my side, while your servant was sleeping. She put him in her arms, and put her dead son in my arms.
1KI 3:21 I got up in the morning to nurse my son, and there he was, dead! But when I examined him carefully in the morning, I realized it was not my baby.”
1KI 3:22 The other woman said, “No! My son is alive; your son is dead!” But the first woman replied, “No, your son is dead; my son is alive.” Each presented her case before the king.
1KI 3:23 The king said, “One says, ‘My son is alive; your son is dead,’ while the other says, ‘No, your son is dead; my son is alive.’”
1KI 3:24 The king ordered, “Get me a sword!” So they placed a sword before the king.
1KI 3:25 The king then said, “Cut the living child in two, and give half to one and half to the other!”
1KI 3:26 The real mother spoke up to the king, for her motherly instincts were aroused. She said, “My master, give her the living child! Whatever you do, don’t kill him!” But the other woman said, “Neither one of us will have him! Let them cut him in two!”
1KI 3:27 The king responded, “Give the first woman the living child; don’t kill him. She is the mother.”
1KI 3:28 When all Israel heard about the judicial decision which the king had rendered, they respected the king, for they realized that he possessed supernatural wisdom to make judicial decisions.
1KI 4:1 King Solomon ruled over all Israel.
1KI 4:2 These were his officials: Azariah son of Zadok was the priest.
1KI 4:3 Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, wrote down what happened. Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was in charge of the records.
1KI 4:4 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was commander of the army. Zadok and Abiathar were priests.
1KI 4:5 Azariah son of Nathan was supervisor of the district governors. Zabud son of Nathan was a priest and adviser to the king.
1KI 4:6 Ahishar was supervisor of the palace. Adoniram son of Abda was supervisor of the work crews.
1KI 4:7 Solomon had twelve district governors appointed throughout Israel who acquired supplies for the king and his palace. Each was responsible for one month in the year.
1KI 4:8 These were their names: Ben-Hur was in charge of the hill country of Ephraim.
1KI 4:9 Ben-Deker was in charge of Makaz, Shaalbim, Beth Shemesh, and Elon Beth Hanan.
1KI 4:10 Ben-Hesed was in charge of Arubboth; he controlled Socoh and all the territory of Hepher.
1KI 4:11 Ben-Abinadab was in charge of Naphath Dor. (He was married to Solomon’s daughter Taphath.)
1KI 4:12 Baana son of Ahilud was in charge of Taanach and Megiddo, as well as all of Beth Shan next to Zarethan below Jezreel, from Beth Shan to Abel Meholah and on past Jokmeam.
1KI 4:13 Ben-Geber was in charge of Ramoth Gilead; he controlled the tent villages of Jair son of Manasseh in Gilead, as well as the region of Argob in Bashan, including sixty large walled cities with bronze bars locking their gates.
1KI 4:14 Ahinadab son of Iddo was in charge of Mahanaim.
1KI 4:15 Ahimaaz was in charge of Naphtali. (He married Solomon’s daughter Basemath.)
1KI 4:16 Baana son of Hushai was in charge of Asher and Aloth.
1KI 4:17 Jehoshaphat son of Paruah was in charge of Issachar.
1KI 4:18 Shimei son of Ela was in charge of Benjamin.
1KI 4:19 Geber son of Uri was in charge of the land of Gilead (the territory which had once belonged to King Sihon of the Amorites and to King Og of Bashan). He was sole governor of the area.
1KI 4:20 The people of Judah and Israel were as innumerable as the sand on the seashore; they had plenty to eat and drink and were happy.
1KI 4:21 Solomon ruled all the kingdoms from the Euphrates River to the land of the Philistines, as far as the border of Egypt. These kingdoms paid tribute as Solomon’s subjects throughout his lifetime.
1KI 4:22 Each day Solomon’s royal court consumed thirty cors of finely milled flour, sixty cors of cereal,
1KI 4:23 ten calves fattened in the stall, twenty calves from the pasture, and a hundred sheep, not to mention rams, gazelles, deer, and well-fed birds.
1KI 4:24 His royal court was so large because he ruled over all the kingdoms west of the Euphrates River from Tiphsah to Gaza; he was at peace with all his neighbors.
1KI 4:25 All the people of Judah and Israel had security; everyone from Dan to Beer Sheba enjoyed the produce of their vines and fig trees throughout Solomon’s lifetime.
1KI 4:26 Solomon had 4,000 stalls for his chariot horses and 12,000 horses.
1KI 4:27 The district governors acquired supplies for King Solomon and all who ate in his royal palace. Each was responsible for one month in the year; they made sure nothing was lacking.
1KI 4:28 Each one also brought to the assigned location his quota of barley and straw for the various horses.
1KI 4:29 God gave Solomon wisdom and very great discernment; the breadth of his understanding was as infinite as the sand on the seashore.
1KI 4:30 Solomon was wiser than all the men of the east and all the sages of Egypt.
1KI 4:31 He was wiser than any man, including Ethan the Ezrahite or Heman, Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol. He was famous in all the neighboring nations.
1KI 4:32 He composed 3,000 proverbs and 1,005 songs.
1KI 4:33 He produced manuals on botany, describing every kind of plant, from the cedars of Lebanon to the hyssop that grows on walls. He also produced manuals on biology, describing animals, birds, insects, and fish.
1KI 4:34 People from all nations came to hear Solomon’s display of wisdom; they came from all the kings of the earth who heard about his wisdom.
1KI 5:1 King Hiram of Tyre sent messengers to Solomon when he heard that he had been anointed king in his father’s place. (Hiram had always been an ally of David.)
1KI 5:2 Solomon then sent this message to Hiram:
1KI 5:3 “You know that my father David was unable to build a temple to honor the Lord his God, for he was busy fighting battles on all fronts while the Lord subdued his enemies.
1KI 5:4 But now the Lord my God has made me secure on all fronts; there is no adversary or dangerous threat.
1KI 5:5 So I have decided to build a temple to honor the Lord my God, as the Lord instructed my father David, ‘Your son, whom I will put on your throne in your place, is the one who will build a temple to honor me.’
1KI 5:6 So now order some cedars of Lebanon to be cut for me. My servants will work with your servants. I will pay your servants whatever you say is appropriate, for you know that we have no one among us who knows how to cut down trees like the Sidonians.”
1KI 5:7 When Hiram heard Solomon’s message, he was very happy. He said, “The Lord is worthy of praise today because he has given David a wise son to rule over this great nation.”
1KI 5:8 Hiram then sent this message to Solomon: “I received the message you sent to me. I will give you all the cedars and evergreens you need.
1KI 5:9 My servants will bring the timber down from Lebanon to the sea. I will send it by sea in raft-like bundles to the place you designate. There I will separate the logs and you can carry them away. In exchange you will supply the food I need for my royal court.”
1KI 5:10 So Hiram supplied the cedars and evergreens Solomon needed,
1KI 5:11 and Solomon supplied Hiram annually with 20,000 cors of wheat as provision for his royal court, as well as 20,000 baths of pure olive oil.
1KI 5:12 So the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he had promised him. And Hiram and Solomon were at peace and made a treaty.
1KI 5:13 King Solomon conscripted work crews from throughout Israel, 30,000 men in all.
1KI 5:14 He sent them to Lebanon in shifts of 10,000 men per month. They worked in Lebanon for one month, and then spent two months at home. Adoniram was supervisor of the work crews.
1KI 5:15 Solomon also had 70,000 common laborers and 80,000 stonecutters in the hills,
1KI 5:16 besides 3,300 officials who supervised the workers.
1KI 5:17 By royal order they supplied large valuable stones in order to build the temple’s foundation with chiseled stone.
1KI 5:18 Solomon’s and Hiram’s construction workers, along with men from Byblos, did the chiseling and prepared the wood and stones for the building of the temple.
1KI 6:1 In the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites left Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, during the month Ziv (the second month), he began building the Lord’s temple.
1KI 6:2 The temple King Solomon built for the Lord was 90 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 45 feet high.
1KI 6:3 The porch in front of the main hall of the temple was 30 feet long, corresponding to the width of the temple. It was 15 feet wide, extending out from the front of the temple.
1KI 6:4 He made framed windows for the temple.
1KI 6:5 He built an extension all around the walls of the temple’s main hall and holy place and constructed side rooms in it.
1KI 6:6 The bottom floor of the extension was seven and a half feet wide, the middle floor nine feet wide, and the third floor ten and a half feet wide. He made ledges on the temple’s outer walls so the beams would not have to be inserted into the walls.
1KI 6:7 As the temple was being built, only stones shaped at the quarry were used; the sound of hammers, pickaxes, or any other iron tool was not heard at the temple while it was being built.
1KI 6:8 The entrance to the bottom level of side rooms was on the south side of the temple; stairs went up to the middle floor and then on up to the third floor.
1KI 6:9 He finished building the temple and covered it with rafters and boards made of cedar.
1KI 6:10 He built an extension all around the temple; it was seven and a half feet high and it was attached to the temple by cedar beams.
1KI 6:11 The Lord said to Solomon:
1KI 6:12 “As for this temple you are building, if you follow my rules, observe my regulations, and obey all my commandments, I will fulfill through you the promise I made to your father David.
1KI 6:13 I will live among the Israelites and will not abandon my people Israel.”
1KI 6:14 So Solomon finished building the temple.
1KI 6:15 He constructed the walls inside the temple with cedar planks; he paneled the inside with wood from the floor of the temple to the rafters of the ceiling. He covered the temple floor with boards made from the wood of evergreens.
1KI 6:16 He built a wall 30 feet in from the rear of the temple as a partition for an inner sanctuary that would be the most holy place. He paneled the wall with cedar planks from the floor to the rafters.
1KI 6:17 The main hall in front of the inner sanctuary was 60 feet long.
1KI 6:18 The inside of the temple was all cedar and was adorned with carvings of round ornaments and of flowers in bloom. Everything was cedar; no stones were visible.
1KI 6:19 He prepared the inner sanctuary inside the temple so that the ark of the covenant of the Lord could be placed there.
1KI 6:20 The inner sanctuary was 30 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 30 feet high. He plated it with gold, as well as the cedar altar.
1KI 6:21 Solomon plated the inside of the temple with gold. He hung golden chains in front of the inner sanctuary and plated the inner sanctuary with gold.
1KI 6:22 He plated the entire inside of the temple with gold, as well as the altar inside the inner sanctuary.
1KI 6:23 In the inner sanctuary he made two cherubs of olive wood; each stood 15 feet high.
1KI 6:24 Each of the first cherub’s wings was seven and a half feet long; its entire wingspan was 15 feet.
1KI 6:25 The second cherub also had a wingspan of 15 feet; it was identical to the first in measurements and shape.
1KI 6:26 Each cherub stood 15 feet high.
1KI 6:27 He put the cherubs in the inner sanctuary of the temple. Their wings were spread out. One of the first cherub’s wings touched one wall and one of the other cherub’s wings touched the opposite wall. The first cherub’s other wing touched the second cherub’s other wing in the middle of the room.
1KI 6:28 He plated the cherubs with gold.
1KI 6:29 On all the walls around the temple, inside and out, he carved cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom.
1KI 6:30 He plated the floor of the temple with gold, inside and out.
1KI 6:31 He made doors of olive wood at the entrance to the inner sanctuary; the pillar on each doorpost was five-sided.
1KI 6:32 On the two doors made of olive wood he carved cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom, and he plated them with gold. He plated the cherubs and the palm trees with hammered gold.
1KI 6:33 In the same way he made doorposts of olive wood for the entrance to the main hall, only with four-sided pillars.
1KI 6:34 He also made two doors out of wood from evergreens; each door had two folding leaves.
1KI 6:35 He carved cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom and plated them with gold, leveled out over the carvings.
1KI 6:36 He built the inner courtyard with three rows of chiseled stones and a row of cedar beams.
1KI 6:37 In the month Ziv of the fourth year of Solomon’s reign the foundation was laid for the Lord’s temple.
1KI 6:38 In the eleventh year, in the month Bul (the eighth month) the temple was completed in accordance with all its specifications and blueprints. It took seven years to build.
1KI 7:1 Solomon took thirteen years to build his palace.
1KI 7:2 He named it “The Palace of the Lebanon Forest”; it was 150 feet long, 75 feet wide, and 45 feet high. It had four rows of cedar pillars and cedar beams above the pillars.
1KI 7:3 The roof above the beams supported by the pillars was also made of cedar; there were forty-five beams, fifteen per row.
1KI 7:4 There were three rows of windows arranged in sets of three.
1KI 7:5 All of the entrances were rectangular in shape and they were arranged in sets of three.
1KI 7:6 He made a colonnade 75 feet long and 45 feet wide. There was a porch in front of this and pillars and a roof in front of the porch.
1KI 7:7 He also made a throne room, called “The Hall of Judgment,” where he made judicial decisions. It was paneled with cedar from the floor to the rafters.
1KI 7:8 The palace where he lived was constructed in a similar way. He also constructed a palace like this hall for Pharaoh’s daughter, whom he had married.
1KI 7:9 All of these were built with the best stones, chiseled to the right size and cut with a saw on all sides, from the foundation to the edge of the roof and from the outside to the great courtyard.
1KI 7:10 The foundation was made of large valuable stones, measuring either 15 feet or 12 feet.
1KI 7:11 Above the foundation the best stones, chiseled to the right size, were used along with cedar.
1KI 7:12 Around the great courtyard were three rows of chiseled stones and one row of cedar beams, like the inner courtyard of the Lord’s temple and the hall of the palace.
1KI 7:13 King Solomon sent for Hiram of Tyre.
1KI 7:14 He was the son of a widow from the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a craftsman in bronze from Tyre. He had the skill and knowledge to make all kinds of works of bronze. He reported to King Solomon and did all the work he was assigned.
1KI 7:15 He fashioned two bronze pillars; each pillar was 27 feet high and 18 feet in circumference.
1KI 7:16 He made two bronze tops for the pillars; each was seven-and-a-half feet high.
1KI 7:17 The latticework on the tops of the pillars was adorned with ornamental wreaths and chains; the top of each pillar had seven groupings of ornaments.
1KI 7:18 When he made the pillars, there were two rows of pomegranate-shaped ornaments around the latticework covering the top of each pillar.
1KI 7:19 The tops of the two pillars in the porch were shaped like lilies and were six feet high.
1KI 7:20 On the top of each pillar, right above the bulge beside the latticework, there were two hundred pomegranate-shaped ornaments arranged in rows all the way around.
1KI 7:21 He set up the pillars on the porch in front of the main hall. He erected one pillar on the right side and called it Jakin; he erected the other pillar on the left side and called it Boaz.
1KI 7:22 The tops of the pillars were shaped like lilies. So the construction of the pillars was completed.
1KI 7:23 He also made the large bronze basin called “The Sea.” It measured 15 feet from rim to rim, was circular in shape, and stood seven-and-a-half feet high. Its circumference was 45 feet.
1KI 7:24 Under the rim all the way around it were round ornaments arranged in settings 15 feet long. The ornaments were in two rows and had been cast with “The Sea.”
1KI 7:25 “The Sea” stood on top of twelve bulls. Three faced northward, three westward, three southward, and three eastward. “The Sea” was placed on top of them, and they all faced outward.
1KI 7:26 It was four fingers thick and its rim was like that of a cup shaped like a lily blossom. It could hold about 12,000 gallons.
1KI 7:27 He also made ten bronze movable stands. Each stand was six feet long, six feet wide, and four-and-a-half feet high.
1KI 7:28 The stands were constructed with frames between the joints.
1KI 7:29 On these frames and joints were ornamental lions, bulls, and cherubs. Under the lions and bulls were decorative wreaths.
1KI 7:30 Each stand had four bronze wheels with bronze axles and four supports. Under the basin the supports were fashioned on each side with wreaths.
1KI 7:31 Inside the stand was a round opening that was a foot-and-a-half deep; it had a support that was two and one-quarter feet long. On the edge of the opening were carvings in square frames.
1KI 7:32 The four wheels were under the frames and the crossbars of the axles were connected to the stand. Each wheel was two and one-quarter feet high.
1KI 7:33 The wheels were constructed like chariot wheels; their crossbars, rims, spokes, and hubs were made of cast metal.
1KI 7:34 Each stand had four supports, one per side projecting out from the stand.
1KI 7:35 On top of each stand was a round opening three-quarters of a foot deep; there were also supports and frames on top of the stands.
1KI 7:36 He engraved ornamental cherubs, lions, and palm trees on the plates of the supports and frames wherever there was room, with wreaths all around.
1KI 7:37 He made the ten stands in this way. All of them were cast in one mold and were identical in measurements and shape.
1KI 7:38 He also made ten bronze basins, each of which could hold about 240 gallons. Each basin was six feet in diameter; there was one basin for each stand.
1KI 7:39 He put five basins on the south side of the temple and five on the north side. He put “The Sea” on the south side, in the southeast corner.
1KI 7:40 Hiram also made basins, shovels, and bowls. He finished all the work on the Lord’s temple he had been assigned by King Solomon.
1KI 7:41 He made the two pillars, the two bowl-shaped tops of the pillars, the latticework for the bowl-shaped tops of the two pillars,
1KI 7:42 the four hundred pomegranate-shaped ornaments for the latticework of the two pillars (each latticework had two rows of these ornaments at the bowl-shaped top of the pillar),
1KI 7:43 the ten movable stands with their ten basins,
1KI 7:44 the big bronze basin called “The Sea” with its twelve bulls underneath,
1KI 7:45 and the pots, shovels, and bowls. All these items King Solomon assigned Hiram to make for the Lord’s temple were made from polished bronze.
1KI 7:46 The king had them cast in earth foundries in the region of the Jordan between Succoth and Zarethan.
1KI 7:47 Solomon left all these items unweighed; there were so many of them they did not weigh the bronze.
1KI 7:48 Solomon also made all these items for the Lord’s temple: the gold altar, the gold table on which was kept the Bread of the Presence,
1KI 7:49 the pure gold lampstands at the entrance to the inner sanctuary (five on the right and five on the left), the gold flower-shaped ornaments, lamps, and tongs,
1KI 7:50 the pure gold bowls, trimming shears, basins, pans, and censers, and the gold door sockets for the inner sanctuary (the most holy place) and for the doors of the main hall of the temple.
1KI 7:51 When King Solomon finished constructing the Lord’s temple, he put the holy items that belonged to his father David (the silver, gold, and other articles) in the treasuries of the Lord’s temple.
1KI 8:1 Then Solomon convened in Jerusalem Israel’s elders, all the leaders of the Israelite tribes and families, so they could witness the transferal of the ark of the Lord’s covenant from the city of David (that is, Zion).
1KI 8:2 All the men of Israel assembled before King Solomon during the festival in the month Ethanim (the seventh month).
1KI 8:3 When all Israel’s elders had arrived, the priests lifted the ark.
1KI 8:4 The priests and Levites carried the ark of the Lord, the tent of meeting, and all the holy items in the tent.
1KI 8:5 Now King Solomon and all the Israelites who had assembled with him went on ahead of the ark and sacrificed more sheep and cattle than could be counted or numbered.
1KI 8:6 The priests brought the ark of the Lord’s covenant to its assigned place in the inner sanctuary of the temple, in the most holy place, under the wings of the cherubs.
1KI 8:7 The cherubs’ wings extended over the place where the ark sat; the cherubs overshadowed the ark and its poles.
1KI 8:8 The poles were so long their ends were visible from the holy place in front of the inner sanctuary, but they could not be seen from beyond that point. They have remained there to this very day.
1KI 8:9 There was nothing in the ark except the two stone tablets Moses had placed there in Horeb. It was there that the Lord made an agreement with the Israelites after he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
1KI 8:10 Once the priests left the holy place, a cloud filled the Lord’s temple.
1KI 8:11 The priests could not carry out their duties because of the cloud; the Lord’s glory filled his temple.
1KI 8:12 Then Solomon said, “The Lord has said that he lives in thick darkness.
1KI 8:13 O Lord, truly I have built a lofty temple for you, a place where you can live permanently.”
1KI 8:14 Then the king turned around and pronounced a blessing over the whole Israelite assembly as they stood there.
1KI 8:15 He said, “The Lord God of Israel is worthy of praise because he has fulfilled what he promised my father David.
1KI 8:16 He told David, ‘Since the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I have not chosen a city from all the tribes of Israel to build a temple in which to live. But I have chosen David to lead my people Israel.’
1KI 8:17 Now my father David had a strong desire to build a temple to honor the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 8:18 The Lord told my father David, ‘It is right for you to have a strong desire to build a temple to honor me.
1KI 8:19 But you will not build the temple; your very own son will build the temple for my honor.’
1KI 8:20 The Lord has kept the promise he made. I have taken my father David’s place and have occupied the throne of Israel, as the Lord promised. I have built this temple for the honor of the Lord God of Israel
1KI 8:21 and set up in it a place for the ark containing the covenant the Lord made with our ancestors when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.”
1KI 8:22 Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in front of the entire assembly of Israel and spread out his hands toward the sky.
1KI 8:23 He prayed: “O Lord, God of Israel, there is no god like you in heaven above or on earth below! You maintain covenantal loyalty to your servants who obey you with sincerity.
1KI 8:24 You have kept your word to your servant, my father David; this very day you have fulfilled what you promised.
1KI 8:25 Now, O Lord, God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant, my father David, when you said, ‘You will never fail to have a successor ruling before me on the throne of Israel, provided that your descendants watch their step and serve me as you have done.’
1KI 8:26 Now, O God of Israel, may the promise you made to your servant, my father David, be realized.
1KI 8:27 “God does not really live on the earth! Look, if the sky and the highest heaven cannot contain you, how much less this temple I have built!
1KI 8:28 But respond favorably to your servant’s prayer and his request for help, O Lord my God. Answer the desperate prayer your servant is presenting to you today.
1KI 8:29 Night and day may you watch over this temple, the place where you promised you would live. May you answer your servant’s prayer for this place.
1KI 8:30 Respond to the request of your servant and your people Israel for this place. Hear from inside your heavenly dwelling place and respond favorably.
1KI 8:31 “When someone is accused of sinning against his neighbor and the latter pronounces a curse on the alleged offender before your altar in this temple, be willing to forgive the accused if the accusation is false.
1KI 8:32 Listen from heaven and make a just decision about your servants’ claims. Condemn the guilty party, declare the other innocent, and give both of them what they deserve.
1KI 8:33 “The time will come when your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they sinned against you. If they come back to you, renew their allegiance to you, and pray for your help in this temple,
1KI 8:34 then listen from heaven, forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them back to the land you gave to their ancestors.
1KI 8:35 “The time will come when the skies are shut up tightly and no rain falls because your people sinned against you. When they direct their prayers toward this place, renew their allegiance to you, and turn away from their sin because you punish them,
1KI 8:36 then listen from heaven and forgive the sin of your servants, your people Israel. Certainly you will then teach them the right way to live and send rain on your land that you have given your people to possess.
1KI 8:37 “The time will come when the land suffers from a famine, a plague, blight and disease, or a locust invasion, or when their enemy lays siege to the cities of the land, or when some other type of plague or epidemic occurs.
1KI 8:38 When all your people Israel pray and ask for help, as they acknowledge their pain and spread out their hands toward this temple,
1KI 8:39 then listen from your heavenly dwelling place, forgive their sin, and act favorably toward each one based on your evaluation of his motives. (Indeed you are the only one who can correctly evaluate the motives of all people.)
1KI 8:40 Then they will obey you throughout their lifetimes as they live on the land you gave to our ancestors.
1KI 8:41 “Foreigners, who do not belong to your people Israel, will come from a distant land because of your reputation.
1KI 8:42 When they hear about your great reputation and your ability to accomplish mighty deeds, they will come and direct their prayers toward this temple.
1KI 8:43 Then listen from your heavenly dwelling place and answer all the prayers of the foreigners. Then all the nations of the earth will acknowledge your reputation, obey you like your people Israel do, and recognize that this temple I built belongs to you.
1KI 8:44 “When you direct your people to march out and fight their enemies, and they direct their prayers to the Lord toward his chosen city and this temple I built for your honor,
1KI 8:45 then listen from heaven to their prayers for help and vindicate them.
1KI 8:46 “The time will come when your people will sin against you (for there is no one who is sinless!) and you will be angry with them and deliver them over to their enemies, who will take them as prisoners to their own land, whether far away or close by.
1KI 8:47 When your people come to their senses in the land where they are held prisoner, they will repent and beg for your mercy in the land of their imprisonment, admitting, ‘We have sinned and gone astray; we have done evil.’
1KI 8:48 When they return to you with all their heart and being in the land where they are held prisoner, and direct their prayers to you toward the land you gave to their ancestors, your chosen city, and the temple I built for your honor,
1KI 8:49 then listen from your heavenly dwelling place to their prayers for help and vindicate them.
1KI 8:50 Forgive all the rebellious acts of your sinful people and cause their captors to have mercy on them.
1KI 8:51 After all, they are your people and your special possession whom you brought out of Egypt, from the middle of the iron-smelting furnace.
1KI 8:52 “May you be attentive to your servant’s and your people Israel’s requests for help and may you respond to all their prayers to you.
1KI 8:53 After all, you picked them out of all the nations of the earth to be your special possession, just as you, O sovereign Lord, announced through your servant Moses when you brought our ancestors out of Egypt.”
1KI 8:54 When Solomon finished presenting all these prayers and requests to the Lord, he got up from before the altar of the Lord where he had kneeled and spread out his hands toward the sky.
1KI 8:55 When he stood up, he pronounced a blessing over the entire assembly of Israel, saying in a loud voice:
1KI 8:56 “The Lord is worthy of praise because he has made Israel his people secure just as he promised! Not one of all the faithful promises he made through his servant Moses is left unfulfilled!
1KI 8:57 May the Lord our God be with us, as he was with our ancestors. May he not abandon us or leave us.
1KI 8:58 May he make us submissive, so we can follow all his instructions and obey the commandments, rules, and regulations he commanded our ancestors.
1KI 8:59 May the Lord our God be constantly aware of these requests of mine I have presented to him, so that he might vindicate his servant and his people Israel as the need arises.
1KI 8:60 Then all the nations of the earth will recognize that the Lord is the only genuine God.
1KI 8:61 May you demonstrate wholehearted devotion to the Lord our God by following his rules and obeying his commandments, as you are presently doing.”
1KI 8:62 The king and all Israel with him were presenting sacrifices to the Lord.
1KI 8:63 Solomon offered as peace offerings to the Lord 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Then the king and all the Israelites dedicated the Lord’s temple.
1KI 8:64 That day the king consecrated the middle of the courtyard that is in front of the Lord’s temple. He offered there burnt sacrifices, grain offerings, and the fat from the peace offerings, because the bronze altar that stood before the Lord was too small to hold all these offerings.
1KI 8:65 At that time Solomon and all Israel with him celebrated a festival before the Lord our God for two entire weeks. This great assembly included people from all over the land, from Lebo Hamath in the north to the Brook of Egypt in the south.
1KI 8:66 On the fifteenth day after the festival started, he dismissed the people. They asked God to empower the king and then went to their homes, happy and content because of all the good the Lord had done for his servant David and his people Israel.
1KI 9:1 After Solomon finished building the Lord’s temple, the royal palace, and all the other construction projects he had planned,
1KI 9:2 the Lord appeared to Solomon a second time, in the same way he had appeared to him at Gibeon.
1KI 9:3 The Lord said to him, “I have answered your prayer and your request for help that you made to me. I have consecrated this temple you built by making it my permanent home; I will be constantly present there.
1KI 9:4 You must serve me with integrity and sincerity, just as your father David did. Do everything I commanded and obey my rules and regulations.
1KI 9:5 Then I will allow your dynasty to rule over Israel permanently, just as I promised your father David, ‘You will not fail to have a successor on the throne of Israel.’
1KI 9:6 “But if you or your sons ever turn away from me, fail to obey the regulations and rules I instructed you to keep, and decide to serve and worship other gods,
1KI 9:7 then I will remove Israel from the land I have given them, I will abandon this temple I have consecrated with my presence, and Israel will be mocked and ridiculed among all the nations.
1KI 9:8 This temple will become a heap of ruins; everyone who passes by it will be shocked and will hiss out their scorn, saying, ‘Why did the Lord do this to this land and this temple?’
1KI 9:9 Others will then answer, ‘Because they abandoned the Lord their God, who led their ancestors out of Egypt. They embraced other gods whom they worshiped and served. That is why the Lord has brought all this disaster down on them.’”
1KI 9:10 After twenty years, during which Solomon built the Lord’s temple and the royal palace,
1KI 9:11 King Solomon gave King Hiram of Tyre twenty cities in the region of Galilee, because Hiram had supplied Solomon with cedars, evergreens, and all the gold he wanted.
1KI 9:12 When Hiram went out from Tyre to inspect the cities Solomon had given him, he was not pleased with them.
1KI 9:13 Hiram asked, “Why did you give me these cities, my friend ?” He called that area the region of Cabul, a name which it has retained to this day.
1KI 9:14 Hiram had sent to the king one hundred twenty talents of gold.
1KI 9:15 Here are the details concerning the work crews King Solomon conscripted to build the Lord’s temple, his palace, the terrace, the wall of Jerusalem, and Gezer.
1KI 9:16 (Pharaoh, king of Egypt, had attacked and captured Gezer. He burned it and killed the Canaanites who lived in the city. He gave it as a wedding present to his daughter, who had married Solomon.)
1KI 9:17 Solomon built up Gezer, lower Beth Horon,
1KI 9:18 Baalath, Tadmor in the wilderness,
1KI 9:19 all the storage cities that belonged to him, and the cities where chariots and horses were kept. He built whatever he wanted in Jerusalem, Lebanon, and throughout his entire kingdom.
1KI 9:20 Now several non-Israelite peoples were left in the land after the conquest of Joshua, including the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
1KI 9:21 Their descendants remained in the land (the Israelites were unable to wipe them out completely). Solomon conscripted them for his work crews, and they continue in that role to this very day.
1KI 9:22 Solomon did not assign Israelites to these work crews; the Israelites served as his soldiers, attendants, officers, charioteers, and commanders of his chariot forces.
1KI 9:23 These men were also in charge of Solomon’s work projects; there were a total of 550 men who supervised the workers.
1KI 9:24 Solomon built the terrace as soon as Pharaoh’s daughter moved up from the city of David to the palace Solomon built for her.
1KI 9:25 Three times a year Solomon offered burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the Lord, burning incense along with them before the Lord. He made the temple his official worship place.
1KI 9:26 King Solomon also built ships in Ezion Geber, which is located near Elat in the land of Edom, on the shore of the Red Sea.
1KI 9:27 Hiram sent his fleet and some of his sailors, who were well acquainted with the sea, to serve with Solomon’s men.
1KI 9:28 They sailed to Ophir, took from there four hundred twenty talents of gold, and then brought them to King Solomon.
1KI 10:1 When the queen of Sheba heard about Solomon, she came to challenge him with difficult questions.
1KI 10:2 She arrived in Jerusalem with a great display of pomp, bringing with her camels carrying spices, a very large quantity of gold, and precious gems. She visited Solomon and discussed with him everything that was on her mind.
1KI 10:3 Solomon answered all her questions; there was no question too complex for the king.
1KI 10:4 When the queen of Sheba saw for herself Solomon’s extensive wisdom, the palace he had built,
1KI 10:5 the food in his banquet hall, his servants and attendants, their robes, his cupbearers, and his burnt offerings which he presented in the Lord’s temple, she was amazed.
1KI 10:6 She said to the king, “The report I heard in my own country about your wise sayings and insight was true!
1KI 10:7 I did not believe these things until I came and saw them with my own eyes. Indeed, I didn’t hear even half the story! Your wisdom and wealth surpass what was reported to me.
1KI 10:8 Your attendants, who stand before you at all times and hear your wise sayings, are truly happy!
1KI 10:9 May the Lord your God be praised because he favored you by placing you on the throne of Israel! Because of the Lord’s eternal love for Israel, he made you king so you could make just and right decisions.”
1KI 10:10 She gave the king 120 talents of gold, a very large quantity of spices, and precious gems. The quantity of spices the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon has never been matched.
1KI 10:11 (Hiram’s fleet, which carried gold from Ophir, also brought from Ophir a very large quantity of fine timber and precious gems.
1KI 10:12 With the timber the king made supports for the Lord’s temple and for the royal palace and stringed instruments for the musicians. No one has seen so much of this fine timber to this very day. )
1KI 10:13 King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba everything she requested, besides what he had freely offered her. Then she left and returned to her homeland with her attendants.
1KI 10:14 Solomon received 666 talents of gold per year,
1KI 10:15 besides what he collected from the merchants, traders, Arabian kings, and governors of the land.
1KI 10:16 King Solomon made two hundred large shields of hammered gold; 600 measures of gold were used for each shield.
1KI 10:17 He also made three hundred small shields of hammered gold; three minas of gold were used for each of these shields. The king placed them in the Palace of the Lebanon Forest.
1KI 10:18 The king made a large throne decorated with ivory and overlaid it with pure gold.
1KI 10:19 There were six steps leading up to the throne, and the back of it was rounded on top. The throne had two armrests with a statue of a lion standing on each side.
1KI 10:20 There were twelve statues of lions on the six steps, one lion at each end of each step. There was nothing like it in any other kingdom.
1KI 10:21 All of King Solomon’s cups were made of gold, and all the household items in the Palace of the Lebanon Forest were made of pure gold. There were no silver items, for silver was not considered very valuable in Solomon’s time.
1KI 10:22 Along with Hiram’s fleet, the king had a fleet of large merchant ships that sailed the sea. Once every three years the fleet came into port with cargoes of gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
1KI 10:23 King Solomon was wealthier and wiser than any of the kings of the earth.
1KI 10:24 Everyone in the world wanted to visit Solomon to see him display his God-given wisdom.
1KI 10:25 Year after year visitors brought their gifts, which included items of silver, items of gold, clothes, perfume, spices, horses, and mules.
1KI 10:26 Solomon accumulated chariots and horses. He had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses. He kept them in assigned cities and in Jerusalem.
1KI 10:27 The king made silver as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones; cedar was as plentiful as sycamore fig trees are in the lowlands.
1KI 10:28 Solomon acquired his horses from Egypt and from Que; the king’s traders purchased them from Que.
1KI 10:29 They paid 600 silver pieces for each chariot from Egypt and 150 silver pieces for each horse. They also sold chariots and horses to all the kings of the Hittites and to the kings of Syria.
1KI 11:1 King Solomon fell in love with many foreign women (besides Pharaoh’s daughter), including Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites.
1KI 11:2 They came from nations about which the Lord had warned the Israelites, “You must not establish friendly relations with them! If you do, they will surely shift your allegiance to their gods.” But Solomon was irresistibly attracted to them.
1KI 11:3 He had 700 royal wives and 300 concubines; his wives had a powerful influence over him.
1KI 11:4 When Solomon became old, his wives shifted his allegiance to other gods; he was not wholeheartedly devoted to the Lord his God, as his father David had been.
1KI 11:5 Solomon worshiped the Sidonian goddess Astarte and the detestable Ammonite god Milcom.
1KI 11:6 Solomon did evil in the Lord’s sight; he did not remain loyal to the Lord, like his father David had.
1KI 11:7 Furthermore, on the hill east of Jerusalem Solomon built a high place for the detestable Moabite god Chemosh and for the detestable Ammonite god Milcom.
1KI 11:8 He built high places for all his foreign wives so they could burn incense and make sacrifices to their gods.
1KI 11:9 The Lord was angry with Solomon because he had shifted his allegiance away from the Lord, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him on two occasions
1KI 11:10 and had warned him about this very thing, so that he would not follow other gods. But he did not obey the Lord’s command.
1KI 11:11 So the Lord said to Solomon, “Because you insist on doing these things and have not kept the covenantal rules I gave you, I will surely tear the kingdom away from you and give it to your servant.
1KI 11:12 However, for your father David’s sake I will not do this while you are alive. I will tear it away from your son’s hand instead.
1KI 11:13 But I will not tear away the entire kingdom; I will leave your son one tribe for my servant David’s sake and for the sake of my chosen city Jerusalem.”
1KI 11:14 The Lord brought against Solomon an enemy, Hadad the Edomite, a descendant of the Edomite king.
1KI 11:15 During David’s campaign against Edom, Joab, the commander of the army, while on a mission to bury the dead, killed every male in Edom.
1KI 11:16 For six months Joab and the entire Israelite army stayed there until they had exterminated every male in Edom.
1KI 11:17 Hadad, who was only a small boy at the time, escaped with some of his father’s Edomite servants and headed for Egypt.
1KI 11:18 They went from Midian to Paran; they took some men from Paran and went to Egypt. Pharaoh, king of Egypt, supplied him with a house and food and even assigned him some land.
1KI 11:19 Pharaoh liked Hadad so well he gave him his sister-in-law (Queen Tahpenes’ sister) as a wife.
1KI 11:20 Tahpenes’ sister gave birth to his son, named Genubath. Tahpenes raised him in Pharaoh’s palace; Genubath grew up in Pharaoh’s palace among Pharaoh’s sons.
1KI 11:21 While in Egypt Hadad heard that David had passed away and that Joab, the commander of the army, was dead. So Hadad asked Pharaoh, “Give me permission to leave so I can return to my homeland.”
1KI 11:22 Pharaoh said to him, “What do you lack here that makes you want to go to your homeland?” Hadad replied, “Nothing, but please give me permission to leave.”
1KI 11:23 God also brought against Solomon another enemy, Rezon son of Eliada who had run away from his master, King Hadadezer of Zobah.
1KI 11:24 He gathered some men and organized a raiding band. When David tried to kill them, they went to Damascus, where they settled down and gained control of the city.
1KI 11:25 He was Israel’s enemy throughout Solomon’s reign and, like Hadad, caused trouble. He loathed Israel and ruled over Syria.
1KI 11:26 Jeroboam son of Nebat, one of Solomon’s servants, rebelled against the king. He was an Ephraimite from Zeredah whose mother was a widow named Zeruah.
1KI 11:27 This is what prompted him to rebel against the king: Solomon built a terrace and he closed up a gap in the wall of the city of his father David.
1KI 11:28 Jeroboam was a talented man; when Solomon saw that the young man was an accomplished worker, he made him the leader of the work crew from the tribe of Joseph.
1KI 11:29 At that time, when Jeroboam had left Jerusalem, the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite met him on the road; the two of them were alone in the open country. Ahijah was wearing a brand new robe,
1KI 11:30 and he grabbed the robe and tore it into twelve pieces.
1KI 11:31 Then he told Jeroboam, “Take ten pieces, for this is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘Look, I am about to tear the kingdom from Solomon’s hand and I will give ten tribes to you.
1KI 11:32 He will retain one tribe, for my servant David’s sake and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel.
1KI 11:33 I am taking the kingdom from him because they have abandoned me and worshiped the Sidonian goddess Astarte, the Moabite god Chemosh, and the Ammonite god Milcom. They have not followed my instructions by doing what I approve and obeying my rules and regulations, like Solomon’s father David did.
1KI 11:34 I will not take the whole kingdom from his hand. I will allow him to be ruler for the rest of his life for the sake of my chosen servant David who kept my commandments and rules.
1KI 11:35 I will take the kingdom from the hand of his son and give ten tribes to you.
1KI 11:36 I will leave his son one tribe so my servant David’s dynasty may continue to serve me in Jerusalem, the city I have chosen as my home.
1KI 11:37 I will select you; you will rule over all you desire to have and you will be king over Israel.
1KI 11:38 You must obey all I command you to do, follow my instructions, do what I approve, and keep my rules and commandments, like my servant David did. Then I will be with you and establish for you a lasting dynasty, as I did for David; I will give you Israel.
1KI 11:39 I will humiliate David’s descendants because of this, but not forever.”
1KI 11:40 Solomon tried to kill Jeroboam, but Jeroboam escaped to Egypt and found refuge with King Shishak of Egypt. He stayed in Egypt until Solomon died.
1KI 11:41 The rest of the events of Solomon’s reign, including all his accomplishments and his wise decisions, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of Solomon.
1KI 11:42 Solomon ruled over all Israel from Jerusalem for forty years.
1KI 11:43 Then Solomon passed away and was buried in the city of his father David. His son Rehoboam replaced him as king.
1KI 12:1 Rehoboam traveled to Shechem, for all Israel had gathered in Shechem to make Rehoboam king.
1KI 12:2 When Jeroboam son of Nebat heard the news, he was still in Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon and had been living ever since.
1KI 12:3 They sent for him, and Jeroboam and the whole Israelite assembly came and spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
1KI 12:4 “Your father made us work too hard. Now if you lighten the demands he made and don’t make us work as hard, we will serve you.”
1KI 12:5 He said to them, “Go away for three days, then return to me.” So the people went away.
1KI 12:6 King Rehoboam consulted with the older advisers who had served his father Solomon when he had been alive. He asked them, “How do you advise me to answer these people?”
1KI 12:7 They said to him, “Today if you show a willingness to help these people and grant their request, they will be your servants from this time forward.”
1KI 12:8 But Rehoboam rejected their advice and consulted the young advisers who served him, with whom he had grown up.
1KI 12:9 He asked them, “How do you advise me to respond to these people who said to me, ‘Lessen the demands your father placed on us’?”
1KI 12:10 The young advisers with whom Rehoboam had grown up said to him, “Say this to these people who have said to you, ‘Your father made us work hard, but now lighten our burden.’ Say this to them: ‘I am a lot harsher than my father!
1KI 12:11 My father imposed heavy demands on you; I will make them even heavier. My father punished you with ordinary whips; I will punish you with whips that really sting your flesh.’”
1KI 12:12 Jeroboam and all the people reported to Rehoboam on the third day, just as the king had ordered when he said, “Return to me on the third day.”
1KI 12:13 The king responded to the people harshly. He rejected the advice of the older men
1KI 12:14 and followed the advice of the younger ones. He said, “My father imposed heavy demands on you; I will make them even heavier. My father punished you with ordinary whips; I will punish you with whips that really sting your flesh.”
1KI 12:15 The king refused to listen to the people, because the Lord was instigating this turn of events so that he might bring to pass the prophetic announcement he had made through Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam son of Nebat.
1KI 12:16 When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people answered the king, “We have no portion in David, no share in the son of Jesse! Return to your homes, O Israel! Now, look after your own dynasty, O David!” So Israel returned to their homes.
1KI 12:17 (Rehoboam continued to rule over the Israelites who lived in the cities of Judah.)
1KI 12:18 King Rehoboam sent Adoniram, the supervisor of the work crews, out after them, but all Israel stoned him to death. King Rehoboam managed to jump into his chariot and escape to Jerusalem.
1KI 12:19 So Israel has been in rebellion against the Davidic dynasty to this very day.
1KI 12:20 When all Israel heard that Jeroboam had returned, they summoned him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. No one except the tribe of Judah remained loyal to the Davidic dynasty.
1KI 12:21 When Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he summoned 180,000 skilled warriors from all of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin to attack Israel and restore the kingdom to Rehoboam son of Solomon.
1KI 12:22 But God told Shemaiah the prophet,
1KI 12:23 “Say this to King Rehoboam son of Solomon of Judah, and to all Judah and Benjamin, as well as the rest of the people,
1KI 12:24 ‘The Lord says this: “Do not attack and make war with your brothers, the Israelites. Each of you go home, for I have caused this to happen.”’” They obeyed the Lord and went home as the Lord had ordered them to do.
1KI 12:25 Jeroboam built up Shechem in the Ephraimite hill country and lived there. From there he went out and built up Penuel.
1KI 12:26 Jeroboam then thought to himself: “Now the Davidic dynasty could regain the kingdom.
1KI 12:27 If these people go up to offer sacrifices in the Lord’s temple in Jerusalem, their loyalty could shift to their former master, King Rehoboam of Judah. They might kill me and return to King Rehoboam of Judah.”
1KI 12:28 After the king had consulted with his advisers, he made two golden calves. Then he said to the people, “It is too much trouble for you to go up to Jerusalem. Look, Israel, here are your gods who brought you up from the land of Egypt.”
1KI 12:29 He put one in Bethel and the other in Dan.
1KI 12:30 This caused Israel to sin; the people went to Bethel and Dan to worship the calves.
1KI 12:31 He built temples on the high places and appointed as priests people who were not Levites.
1KI 12:32 Jeroboam inaugurated a festival on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, like the festival celebrated in Judah. On the altar in Bethel he offered sacrifices to the calves he had made. In Bethel he also appointed priests for the high places he had made.
1KI 12:33 On the fifteenth day of the eighth month (a date he had arbitrarily chosen) Jeroboam offered sacrifices on the altar he had made in Bethel. He inaugurated a festival for the Israelites and went up to the altar to offer sacrifices.
1KI 13:1 Just then a prophet from Judah, sent by the Lord, arrived in Bethel, as Jeroboam was standing near the altar ready to offer a sacrifice.
1KI 13:2 With the authority of the Lord he cried out against the altar, “O altar, altar! This is what the Lord says, ‘Look, a son named Josiah will be born to the Davidic dynasty. He will sacrifice on you the priests of the high places who offer sacrifices on you. Human bones will be burned on you.’”
1KI 13:3 That day he also announced a sign, “This is the sign the Lord has predetermined: The altar will be split open and the ashes on it will fall to the ground.”
1KI 13:4 When the king heard what the prophet cried out against the altar in Bethel, Jeroboam, standing at the altar, extended his hand and ordered, “Seize him!” The hand he had extended shriveled up and he could not pull it back.
1KI 13:5 The altar split open and the ashes fell from the altar to the ground, in fulfillment of the sign the prophet had announced with the Lord’s authority.
1KI 13:6 The king pled with the prophet, “Seek the favor of the Lord your God and pray for me, so that my hand may be restored.” So the prophet sought the Lord’s favor and the king’s hand was restored to its former condition.
1KI 13:7 The king then said to the prophet, “Come home with me and have something to eat. I’d like to give a present.”
1KI 13:8 But the prophet said to the king, “Even if you were to give me half your possessions, I could not go with you and eat and drink in this place.
1KI 13:9 For the Lord gave me strict orders, ‘Do not eat or drink there and do not go home the way you came.’”
1KI 13:10 So he started back on another road; he did not travel back on the same road he had taken to Bethel.
1KI 13:11 Now there was an old prophet living in Bethel. When his sons came home, they told their father everything the prophet had done in Bethel that day and all the words he had spoken to the king.
1KI 13:12 Their father asked them, “Which road did he take?” His sons showed him the road the prophet from Judah had taken.
1KI 13:13 He then told his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” When they had saddled the donkey for him, he mounted it
1KI 13:14 and took off after the prophet, whom he found sitting under an oak tree. He asked him, “Are you the prophet from Judah?” He answered, “Yes, I am.”
1KI 13:15 He then said to him, “Come home with me and eat something.”
1KI 13:16 But he replied, “I can’t go back with you or eat and drink with you in this place.
1KI 13:17 For the Lord gave me strict orders, ‘Do not eat or drink there; do not go back the way you came.’”
1KI 13:18 The old prophet then said, “I too am a prophet like you. An angel told me with the Lord’s authority, ‘Bring him back with you to your house so he can eat and drink.’” But he was lying to him.
1KI 13:19 So the prophet went back with him and ate and drank in his house.
1KI 13:20 While they were sitting at the table, the Lord spoke through the old prophet
1KI 13:21 and he cried out to the prophet from Judah, “This is what the Lord says, ‘You have rebelled against the Lord and have not obeyed the command the Lord your God gave you.
1KI 13:22 You went back and ate and drank in this place, even though he said to you, “Do not eat or drink there.” Therefore your corpse will not be buried in your ancestral tomb.’”
1KI 13:23 When the prophet from Judah finished his meal, the old prophet saddled his visitor’s donkey for him.
1KI 13:24 As the prophet from Judah was traveling, a lion attacked him on the road and killed him. His corpse was lying on the road, and the donkey and the lion just stood there beside it.
1KI 13:25 Some men came by and saw the corpse lying in the road with the lion standing beside it. They went and reported what they had seen in the city where the old prophet lived.
1KI 13:26 When the old prophet who had invited him to his house heard the news, he said, “It is the prophet who rebelled against the Lord. The Lord delivered him over to the lion and it ripped him up and killed him, just as the Lord warned him.”
1KI 13:27 He told his sons, “Saddle my donkey,” and they did so.
1KI 13:28 He went and found the corpse lying in the road with the donkey and the lion standing beside it; the lion had neither eaten the corpse nor attacked the donkey.
1KI 13:29 The old prophet picked up the corpse of the prophet, put it on the donkey, and brought it back. The old prophet then entered the city to mourn him and to bury him.
1KI 13:30 He put the corpse into his own tomb, and they mourned over him, saying, “Ah, my brother!”
1KI 13:31 After he buried him, he said to his sons, “When I die, bury me in the tomb where the prophet is buried; put my bones right beside his bones,
1KI 13:32 for the prophecy he announced with the Lord’s authority against the altar in Bethel and against all the temples on the high places in the cities of the north will certainly be fulfilled.”
1KI 13:33 After this happened, Jeroboam still did not change his evil ways; he continued to appoint common people as priests at the high places. Anyone who wanted the job he consecrated as a priest.
1KI 13:34 This sin caused Jeroboam’s dynasty to come to an end and to be destroyed from the face of the earth.
1KI 14:1 At that time Jeroboam’s son Abijah became sick.
1KI 14:2 Jeroboam told his wife, “Disguise yourself so that people cannot recognize you are Jeroboam’s wife. Then go to Shiloh; Ahijah the prophet, who told me I would rule over this nation, lives there.
1KI 14:3 Take ten loaves of bread, some small cakes, and a container of honey and visit him. He will tell you what will happen to the boy.”
1KI 14:4 Jeroboam’s wife did as she was told. She went to Shiloh and visited Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see; he had lost his eyesight in his old age.
1KI 14:5 But the Lord had told Ahijah, “Look, Jeroboam’s wife is coming to find out from you what will happen to her son, for he is sick. Tell her so-and-so. When she comes, she will be in a disguise.”
1KI 14:6 When Ahijah heard the sound of her footsteps as she came through the door, he said, “Come on in, wife of Jeroboam! Why are you pretending to be someone else? I have been commissioned to give you bad news.
1KI 14:7 Go, tell Jeroboam, ‘This is what the Lord God of Israel says: “I raised you up from among the people and made you ruler over my people Israel.
1KI 14:8 I tore the kingdom away from the Davidic dynasty and gave it to you. But you are not like my servant David, who kept my commandments and followed me wholeheartedly by doing only what I approve.
1KI 14:9 You have sinned more than all who came before you. You went and angered me by making other gods, formed out of metal; you have completely disregarded me.
1KI 14:10 So I am ready to bring disaster on the dynasty of Jeroboam. I will cut off every last male belonging to Jeroboam in Israel, including even the weak and incapacitated. I will burn up the dynasty of Jeroboam, just as one burns manure until it is completely consumed.
1KI 14:11 Dogs will eat the members of your family who die in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat the ones who die in the country.”’ Indeed, the Lord has announced it!
1KI 14:12 “As for you, get up and go home. When you set foot in the city, the boy will die.
1KI 14:13 All Israel will mourn him and bury him. He is the only one in Jeroboam’s family who will receive a decent burial, for he is the only one in whom the Lord God of Israel found anything good.
1KI 14:14 The Lord will raise up a king over Israel who will cut off Jeroboam’s dynasty. It is ready to happen!
1KI 14:15 The Lord will attack Israel, making it like a reed that sways in the water. He will remove Israel from this good land he gave to their ancestors and scatter them beyond the Euphrates River, because they angered the Lord by making Asherah poles.
1KI 14:16 He will hand Israel over to their enemies because of the sins which Jeroboam committed and which he made Israel commit.”
1KI 14:17 So Jeroboam’s wife got up and went back to Tirzah. As she crossed the threshold of the house, the boy died.
1KI 14:18 All Israel buried him and mourned for him, just as the Lord had predicted through his servant the prophet Ahijah.
1KI 14:19 The rest of the events of Jeroboam’s reign, including the details of his battles and rule, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 14:20 Jeroboam ruled for twenty-two years; then he passed away. His son Nadab replaced him as king.
1KI 14:21 Now Rehoboam son of Solomon ruled in Judah. He was forty-one years old when he became king and he ruled for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the Lord chose from all the tribes of Israel to be his home. His mother was an Ammonite woman named Naamah.
1KI 14:22 Judah did evil in the sight of the Lord. They made him more jealous by their sins than their ancestors had done.
1KI 14:23 They even built for themselves high places, sacred pillars, and Asherah poles on every high hill and under every green tree.
1KI 14:24 There were also male cultic prostitutes in the land. They committed the same horrible sins as the nations that the Lord had driven out from before the Israelites.
1KI 14:25 In King Rehoboam’s fifth year, King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem.
1KI 14:26 He took away the treasures of the Lord’s temple and of the royal palace; he took everything, including all the golden shields that Solomon had made.
1KI 14:27 King Rehoboam made bronze shields to replace them and assigned them to the officers of the royal guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace.
1KI 14:28 Whenever the king visited the Lord’s temple, the royal guard carried them and then brought them back to the guardroom.
1KI 14:29 The rest of the events of Rehoboam’s reign, including his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
1KI 14:30 Rehoboam and Jeroboam were continually at war with each other.
1KI 14:31 Rehoboam passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of David. His mother was an Ammonite named Naamah. His son Abijah replaced him as king.
1KI 15:1 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam son of Nebat, Abijah became king over Judah.
1KI 15:2 He ruled for three years in Jerusalem. His mother was Maacah, the daughter of Abishalom.
1KI 15:3 He followed all the sinful practices of his father before him. He was not wholeheartedly devoted to the Lord his God, as his ancestor David had been.
1KI 15:4 Nevertheless for David’s sake the Lord his God maintained his dynasty in Jerusalem by giving him a son to succeed him and by protecting Jerusalem.
1KI 15:5 He did this because David had done what he approved and had not disregarded any of his commandments his entire lifetime, except for the incident involving Uriah the Hittite.
1KI 15:6 Rehoboam and Jeroboam were continually at war with each other throughout Abijah’s lifetime.
1KI 15:7 The rest of the events of Abijah’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah. Abijah and Jeroboam had been at war with each other.
1KI 15:8 Abijah passed away and was buried in the city of David. His son Asa replaced him as king.
1KI 15:9 In the twentieth year of Jeroboam’s reign over Israel, Asa became the king of Judah.
1KI 15:10 He ruled for forty-one years in Jerusalem. His grandmother was Maacah daughter of Abishalom.
1KI 15:11 Asa did what the Lord approved like his ancestor David had done.
1KI 15:12 He removed the male cultic prostitutes from the land and got rid of all the disgusting idols his ancestors had made.
1KI 15:13 He also removed Maacah his grandmother from her position as queen because she had made a loathsome Asherah pole. Asa cut down her Asherah pole and burned it in the Kidron Valley.
1KI 15:14 The high places were not eliminated, yet Asa was wholeheartedly devoted to the Lord throughout his lifetime.
1KI 15:15 He brought the holy items that he and his father had made into the Lord’s temple, including the silver, gold, and other articles.
1KI 15:16 Now Asa and King Baasha of Israel were continually at war with each other.
1KI 15:17 King Baasha of Israel attacked Judah and established Ramah as a military outpost to prevent anyone from leaving or entering the land of King Asa of Judah.
1KI 15:18 Asa took all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of the Lord’s temple and of the royal palace and handed it to his servants. He then told them to deliver it to Ben Hadad son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, ruler in Damascus, along with this message:
1KI 15:19 “I want to make a treaty with you, like the one our fathers made. See, I have sent you silver and gold as a present. Break your treaty with King Baasha of Israel, so he will retreat from my land.”
1KI 15:20 Ben Hadad accepted King Asa’s offer and ordered his army commanders to attack the cities of Israel. They conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel Beth Maacah, and all the territory of Naphtali, including the region of Kinnereth.
1KI 15:21 When Baasha heard the news, he stopped fortifying Ramah and settled down in Tirzah.
1KI 15:22 King Asa ordered all the men of Judah (no exemptions were granted) to carry away the stones and wood that Baasha had used to build Ramah. King Asa used the materials to build up Geba (in Benjamin) and Mizpah.
1KI 15:23 The rest of the events of Asa’s reign, including all his successes and accomplishments, as well as a record of the cities he built, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah. Yet when he was very old he developed a foot disease.
1KI 15:24 Asa passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of his ancestor David. His son Jehoshaphat replaced him as king.
1KI 15:25 In the second year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Jeroboam’s son Nadab became the king of Israel; he ruled Israel for two years.
1KI 15:26 He did evil in the sight of the Lord. He followed in his father’s footsteps and encouraged Israel to sin.
1KI 15:27 Baasha son of Ahijah, from the tribe of Issachar, conspired against Nadab and assassinated him in Gibbethon, which was in Philistine territory. This happened while Nadab and all the Israelite army were besieging Gibbethon.
1KI 15:28 Baasha killed him in the third year of Asa’s reign over Judah and replaced him as king.
1KI 15:29 When he became king, he executed Jeroboam’s entire family. He wiped out everyone who breathed, just as the Lord had predicted through his servant Ahijah the Shilonite.
1KI 15:30 This happened because of the sins which Jeroboam committed and which he made Israel commit. These sins angered the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 15:31 The rest of the events of Nadab’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 15:32 Asa and King Nadab of Israel were continually at war with each other.
1KI 15:33 In the third year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Baasha son of Ahijah became king over all Israel in Tirzah; he ruled for twenty-four years.
1KI 15:34 He did evil in the sight of the Lord; he followed in Jeroboam’s footsteps and encouraged Israel to sin.
1KI 16:1 Jehu son of Hanani received from the Lord this message predicting Baasha’s downfall:
1KI 16:2 “I raised you up from the dust and made you ruler over my people Israel. Yet you followed in Jeroboam’s footsteps and encouraged my people Israel to sin; their sins have made me angry.
1KI 16:3 So I am ready to burn up Baasha and his family, and make your family like the family of Jeroboam son of Nebat.
1KI 16:4 Dogs will eat the members of Baasha’s family who die in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat the ones who die in the country.”
1KI 16:5 The rest of the events of Baasha’s reign, including his accomplishments and successes, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 16:6 Baasha passed away and was buried in Tirzah. His son Elah replaced him as king.
1KI 16:7 The prophet Jehu son of Hanani received from the Lord the message predicting the downfall of Baasha and his family because of all the evil Baasha had done in the sight of the Lord. His actions angered the Lord (including the way he had destroyed Jeroboam’s dynasty), so that his family ended up like Jeroboam’s.
1KI 16:8 In the twenty-sixth year of King Asa’s reign over Judah, Baasha’s son Elah became king over Israel; he ruled in Tirzah for two years.
1KI 16:9 His servant Zimri, a commander of half of his chariot force, conspired against him. While Elah was drinking heavily at the house of Arza, who supervised the palace in Tirzah,
1KI 16:10 Zimri came in and struck him dead. (This happened in the twenty-seventh year of Asa’s reign over Judah.) Zimri replaced Elah as king.
1KI 16:11 When he became king and occupied the throne, he killed Baasha’s entire family. He did not spare any male belonging to him; he killed his relatives and his friends.
1KI 16:12 Zimri destroyed Baasha’s entire family, just as the Lord had predicted to Baasha through Jehu the prophet.
1KI 16:13 This happened because of all the sins which Baasha and his son Elah committed and which they made Israel commit. They angered the Lord God of Israel with their worthless idols.
1KI 16:14 The rest of the events of Elah’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 16:15 In the twenty-seventh year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Zimri became king over Israel; he ruled for seven days in Tirzah. Zimri’s revolt took place while the army was deployed in Gibbethon, which was in Philistine territory.
1KI 16:16 While deployed there, the army received this report: “Zimri has conspired against the king and assassinated him.” So all Israel made Omri, the commander of the army, king over Israel that very day in the camp.
1KI 16:17 Omri and all Israel went up from Gibbethon and besieged Tirzah.
1KI 16:18 When Zimri saw that the city was captured, he went into the fortified area of the royal palace. He set the palace on fire and died in the flames.
1KI 16:19 This happened because of the sins he committed. He did evil in the sight of the Lord and followed in Jeroboam’s footsteps and encouraged Israel to continue sinning.
1KI 16:20 The rest of the events of Zimri’s reign, including the details of his revolt, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 16:21 At that time the people of Israel were divided in their loyalties. Half the people supported Tibni son of Ginath and wanted to make him king; the other half supported Omri.
1KI 16:22 Omri’s supporters were stronger than those who supported Tibni son of Ginath. Tibni died; Omri became king.
1KI 16:23 In the thirty-first year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Omri became king over Israel. He ruled for twelve years, six of them in Tirzah.
1KI 16:24 He purchased the hill of Samaria from Shemer for two talents of silver. He launched a construction project there and named the city he built after Shemer, the former owner of the hill of Samaria.
1KI 16:25 Omri did more evil in the sight of the Lord than all who were before him.
1KI 16:26 He followed in the footsteps of Jeroboam son of Nebat and encouraged Israel to sin; they angered the Lord God of Israel with their worthless idols.
1KI 16:27 The rest of the events of Omri’s reign, including his accomplishments and successes, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 16:28 Omri passed away and was buried in Samaria. His son Ahab replaced him as king.
1KI 16:29 In the thirty-eighth year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Omri’s son Ahab became king over Israel. Ahab son of Omri ruled over Israel for twenty-two years in Samaria.
1KI 16:30 Ahab son of Omri did more evil in the sight of the Lord than all who were before him.
1KI 16:31 As if following in the sinful footsteps of Jeroboam son of Nebat were not bad enough, he married Jezebel the daughter of King Ethbaal of the Sidonians. Then he worshiped and bowed to Baal.
1KI 16:32 He set up an altar for Baal in the temple of Baal he had built in Samaria.
1KI 16:33 Ahab also made an Asherah pole; he did more to anger the Lord God of Israel than all the kings of Israel who were before him.
1KI 16:34 During Ahab’s reign, Hiel the Bethelite rebuilt Jericho. Abiram, his firstborn son, died when he laid the foundation; Segub, his youngest son, died when he erected its gates, just as the Lord had warned through Joshua son of Nun.
1KI 17:1 Elijah the Tishbite, from Tishbe in Gilead, said to Ahab, “As certainly as the Lord God of Israel lives (whom I serve), there will be no dew or rain in the years ahead unless I give the command.”
1KI 17:2 The Lord told him:
1KI 17:3 “Leave here and travel eastward. Hide out in the Kerith Valley near the Jordan.
1KI 17:4 Drink from the stream; I have already told the ravens to bring you food there.”
1KI 17:5 So he did as the Lord told him; he went and lived in the Kerith Valley near the Jordan.
1KI 17:6 The ravens would bring him bread and meat each morning and evening, and he would drink from the stream.
1KI 17:7 After a while, the stream dried up because there had been no rain in the land.
1KI 17:8 The Lord told him,
1KI 17:9 “Get up, go to Zarephath in Sidonian territory, and live there. I have already told a widow who lives there to provide for you.”
1KI 17:10 So he got up and went to Zarephath. When he went through the city gate, there was a widow gathering wood. He called out to her, “Please give me a cup of water, so I can take a drink.”
1KI 17:11 As she went to get it, he called out to her, “Please bring me a piece of bread.”
1KI 17:12 She said, “As certainly as the Lord your God lives, I have no food, except for a handful of flour in a jar and a little olive oil in a jug. Right now I am gathering a couple of sticks for a fire. Then I’m going home to make one final meal for my son and myself. After we have eaten that, we will die of starvation.”
1KI 17:13 Elijah said to her, “Don’t be afraid. Go and do as you planned. But first make a small cake for me and bring it to me; then make something for yourself and your son.
1KI 17:14 For this is what the Lord God of Israel says, ‘The jar of flour will not be empty and the jug of oil will not run out until the day the Lord makes it rain on the surface of the ground.’”
1KI 17:15 She went and did as Elijah told her; there was always enough food for Elijah and for her and her family.
1KI 17:16 The jar of flour was never empty and the jug of oil never ran out, just as the Lord had promised through Elijah.
1KI 17:17 After this the son of the woman who owned the house got sick. His illness was so severe he could no longer breathe.
1KI 17:18 She asked Elijah, “Why, prophet, have you come to me to confront me with my sin and kill my son?”
1KI 17:19 He said to her, “Hand me your son.” He took him from her arms, carried him to the upper room where he was staying, and laid him down on his bed.
1KI 17:20 Then he called out to the Lord, “O Lord, my God, are you also bringing disaster on this widow I am staying with by killing her son?”
1KI 17:21 He stretched out over the boy three times and called out to the Lord, “O Lord, my God, please let this boy’s breath return to him.”
1KI 17:22 The Lord answered Elijah’s prayer; the boy’s breath returned to him and he lived.
1KI 17:23 Elijah took the boy, brought him down from the upper room to the house, and handed him to his mother. Elijah then said, “See, your son is alive!”
1KI 17:24 The woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a prophet and that the Lord really does speak through you.”
1KI 18:1 Some time later, in the third year of the famine, the Lord told Elijah, “Go, make an appearance before Ahab, so I may send rain on the surface of the ground.”
1KI 18:2 So Elijah went to make an appearance before Ahab. Now the famine was severe in Samaria.
1KI 18:3 So Ahab summoned Obadiah, who supervised the palace. (Now Obadiah was a very loyal follower of the Lord.
1KI 18:4 When Jezebel was killing the Lord’s prophets, Obadiah took one hundred prophets and hid them in two caves in two groups of fifty. He also brought them food and water.)
1KI 18:5 Ahab told Obadiah, “Go through the land to all the springs and valleys. Maybe we can find some grazing areas so we can keep the horses and mules alive and not have to kill some of the animals.”
1KI 18:6 They divided up the land between them; Ahab went one way and Obadiah went the other.
1KI 18:7 As Obadiah was traveling along, Elijah met him. When he recognized him, he fell facedown to the ground and said, “Is it really you, my master, Elijah?”
1KI 18:8 He replied, “Yes, go and say to your master, ‘Elijah is back.’”
1KI 18:9 Obadiah said, “What sin have I committed that you are ready to hand your servant over to Ahab for execution?
1KI 18:10 As certainly as the Lord your God lives, my master has sent to every nation and kingdom in an effort to find you. When they say, ‘He’s not here,’ he makes them swear an oath that they could not find you.
1KI 18:11 Now you say, ‘Go and say to your master, “Elijah is back.”’
1KI 18:12 But when I leave you, the Lord’s spirit will carry you away so I can’t find you. If I go tell Ahab I’ve seen you, he won’t be able to find you and he will kill me. That would not be fair, because your servant has been a loyal follower of the Lord from my youth.
1KI 18:13 Certainly my master is aware of what I did when Jezebel was killing the Lord’s prophets. I hid one hundred of the Lord’s prophets in two caves in two groups of fifty and I brought them food and water.
1KI 18:14 Now you say, ‘Go and say to your master, “Elijah is back,”’ but he will kill me.”
1KI 18:15 But Elijah said, “As certainly as the Lord who rules over all lives (whom I serve), I will make an appearance before him today.”
1KI 18:16 When Obadiah went and informed Ahab, the king went to meet Elijah.
1KI 18:17 When Ahab saw Elijah, he said to him, “Is it really you, the one who brings disaster on Israel?”
1KI 18:18 Elijah replied, “I have not brought disaster on Israel. But you and your father’s dynasty have, by abandoning the Lord’s commandments and following the Baals.
1KI 18:19 Now send out messengers and assemble all Israel before me at Mount Carmel, as well as the 450 prophets of Baal and 400 prophets of Asherah whom Jezebel supports.
1KI 18:20 Ahab sent messengers to all the Israelites and had the prophets assemble at Mount Carmel.
1KI 18:21 Elijah approached all the people and said, “How long are you going to be paralyzed by indecision? If the Lord is the true God, then follow him, but if Baal is, follow him!” But the people did not say a word.
1KI 18:22 Elijah said to them: “I am the only prophet of the Lord who is left, but there are 450 prophets of Baal.
1KI 18:23 Let them bring us two bulls. Let them choose one of the bulls for themselves, cut it up into pieces, and place it on the wood. But they must not set it on fire. I will do the same to the other bull and place it on the wood. But I will not set it on fire.
1KI 18:24 Then you will invoke the name of your god, and I will invoke the name of the Lord. The god who responds with fire will demonstrate that he is the true God.” All the people responded, “This will be a fair test.”
1KI 18:25 Elijah told the prophets of Baal, “Choose one of the bulls for yourselves and go first, for you are the majority. Invoke the name of your god, but do not light a fire.”
1KI 18:26 So they took a bull, as he had suggested, and prepared it. They invoked the name of Baal from morning until noon, saying, “Baal, answer us.” But there was no sound and no answer. They jumped around on the altar they had made.
1KI 18:27 At noon Elijah mocked them, “Yell louder! After all, he is a god; he may be deep in thought, or perhaps he stepped out for a moment or has taken a trip. Perhaps he is sleeping and needs to be awakened.”
1KI 18:28 So they yelled louder and, in accordance with their prescribed ritual, mutilated themselves with swords and spears until their bodies were covered with blood.
1KI 18:29 Throughout the afternoon they were in an ecstatic frenzy, but there was no sound, no answer, and no response.
1KI 18:30 Elijah then told all the people, “Approach me.” So all the people approached him. He repaired the altar of the Lord that had been torn down.
1KI 18:31 Then Elijah took twelve stones, corresponding to the number of tribes that descended from Jacob, to whom the Lord had said, “Israel will be your new name.”
1KI 18:32 With the stones he constructed an altar for the Lord. Around the altar he made a trench large enough to contain two seahs of seed.
1KI 18:33 He arranged the wood, cut up the bull, and placed it on the wood.
1KI 18:34 Then he said, “Fill four water jars and pour the water on the offering and the wood.” When they had done so, he said, “Do it again.” So they did it again. Then he said, “Do it a third time.” So they did it a third time.
1KI 18:35 The water flowed down all sides of the altar and filled the trench.
1KI 18:36 When it was time for the evening offering, Elijah the prophet approached the altar and prayed: “O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, prove today that you are God in Israel and that I am your servant and have done all these things at your command.
1KI 18:37 Answer me, O Lord, answer me, so these people will know that you, O Lord, are the true God and that you are winning back their allegiance.”
1KI 18:38 Then fire from the Lord fell from the sky. It consumed the offering, the wood, the stones, and the dirt, and licked up the water in the trench.
1KI 18:39 When all the people saw this, they threw themselves down with their faces to the ground and said, “The Lord is the true God! The Lord is the true God!”
1KI 18:40 Elijah told them, “Seize the prophets of Baal! Don’t let even one of them escape!” So they seized them, and Elijah led them down to the Kishon Valley and executed them there.
1KI 18:41 Then Elijah told Ahab, “Go on up and eat and drink, for the sound of a heavy rainstorm can be heard.”
1KI 18:42 So Ahab went on up to eat and drink, while Elijah climbed to the top of Carmel. He bent down toward the ground and put his face between his knees.
1KI 18:43 He told his servant, “Go on up and look in the direction of the sea.” So he went on up, looked, and reported, “There is nothing.” Seven times Elijah sent him to look.
1KI 18:44 The seventh time the servant said, “Look, a small cloud, the size of the palm of a man’s hand, is rising up from the sea.” Elijah then said, “Go and tell Ahab, ‘Hitch up the chariots and go down, so that the rain won’t overtake you.’”
1KI 18:45 Meanwhile the sky was covered with dark clouds, the wind blew, and there was a heavy rainstorm. Ahab rode toward Jezreel.
1KI 18:46 Now the Lord energized Elijah with power; he tucked his robe into his belt and ran ahead of Ahab all the way to Jezreel.
1KI 19:1 Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, including a detailed account of how he killed all the prophets with the sword.
1KI 19:2 Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah with this warning, “May the gods judge me severely if by this time tomorrow I do not take your life as you did theirs!”
1KI 19:3 Elijah was afraid, so he got up and fled for his life to Beer Sheba in Judah. He left his servant there,
1KI 19:4 while he went a day’s journey into the desert. He went and sat down under a shrub and asked the Lord to take his life: “I’ve had enough! Now, O Lord, take my life. After all, I’m no better than my ancestors.”
1KI 19:5 He stretched out and fell asleep under the shrub. All of a sudden an angelic messenger touched him and said, “Get up and eat.”
1KI 19:6 He looked and right there by his head was a cake baking on hot coals and a jug of water. He ate and drank and then slept some more.
1KI 19:7 The Lord’s angelic messenger came back again, touched him, and said, “Get up and eat, for otherwise you won’t be able to make the journey.”
1KI 19:8 So he got up and ate and drank. That meal gave him the strength to travel forty days and forty nights until he reached Horeb, the mountain of God.
1KI 19:9 He went into a cave there and spent the night. All of a sudden the Lord spoke to him, “Why are you here, Elijah?”
1KI 19:10 He answered, “I have been absolutely loyal to the Lord, the sovereign God, even though the Israelites have abandoned the agreement they made with you, torn down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left and now they want to take my life.”
1KI 19:11 The Lord said, “Go out and stand on the mountain before the Lord. Look, the Lord is ready to pass by.” A very powerful wind went before the Lord, digging into the mountain and causing landslides, but the Lord was not in the wind. After the windstorm there was an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake.
1KI 19:12 After the earthquake, there was a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire. After the fire, there was a soft whisper.
1KI 19:13 When Elijah heard it, he covered his face with his robe and went out and stood at the entrance to the cave. All of a sudden a voice asked him, “Why are you here, Elijah?”
1KI 19:14 He answered, “I have been absolutely loyal to the Lord, the sovereign God, even though the Israelites have abandoned the agreement they made with you, torn down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left and now they want to take my life.”
1KI 19:15 The Lord said to him, “Go back the way you came and then head for the Desert of Damascus. Go and anoint Hazael king over Syria.
1KI 19:16 You must anoint Jehu son of Nimshi king over Israel, and Elisha son of Shaphat from Abel Meholah to take your place as prophet.
1KI 19:17 Jehu will kill anyone who escapes Hazael’s sword, and Elisha will kill anyone who escapes Jehu’s sword.
1KI 19:18 I still have left in Israel seven thousand followers who have not bowed their knees to Baal or kissed the images of him.”
1KI 19:19 Elijah went from there and found Elisha son of Shaphat. He was plowing with twelve pairs of oxen; he was near the twelfth pair. Elijah passed by him and threw his robe over him.
1KI 19:20 He left the oxen, ran after Elijah, and said, “Please let me kiss my father and mother goodbye, then I will follow you.” Elijah said to him, “Go back! Indeed, what have I done to you?”
1KI 19:21 Elisha went back and took his pair of oxen and slaughtered them. He cooked the meat over a fire that he made by burning the harness and yoke. He gave the people meat and they ate. Then he got up and followed Elijah and became his assistant.
1KI 20:1 Now King Ben Hadad of Syria assembled all his army, along with thirty-two other kings with their horses and chariots. He marched against Samaria and besieged and attacked it.
1KI 20:2 He sent messengers to King Ahab of Israel, who was in the city.
1KI 20:3 He said to him, “This is what Ben Hadad says, ‘Your silver and your gold are mine, as well as the best of your wives and sons.’”
1KI 20:4 The king of Israel replied, “It is just as you say, my master, O king. I and all I own belong to you.”
1KI 20:5 The messengers came again and said, “This is what Ben Hadad says, ‘I sent this message to you, “You must give me your silver, gold, wives, and sons.”
1KI 20:6 But now at this time tomorrow I will send my servants to you and they will search through your palace and your servants’ houses. They will carry away all your valuables.”
1KI 20:7 The king of Israel summoned all the leaders of the land and said, “Notice how this man is looking for trouble. Indeed, he demanded my wives, sons, silver, and gold, and I did not resist him.”
1KI 20:8 All the leaders and people said to him, “Do not give in or agree to his demands.”
1KI 20:9 So he said to the messengers of Ben Hadad, “Say this to my master, the king, ‘I will give you everything you demanded at first from your servant, but I am unable to agree to this latest demand.’” So the messengers went back and gave their report.
1KI 20:10 Ben Hadad sent another message to him, “May the gods judge me severely if there is enough dirt left in Samaria for my soldiers to scoop up in their hands.”
1KI 20:11 The king of Israel replied, “Tell him the one who puts on his battle gear should not boast like one who is taking it off.”
1KI 20:12 When Ben Hadad received this reply, he and the other kings were drinking in their quarters. He ordered his servants, “Get ready to attack!” So they got ready to attack the city.
1KI 20:13 Now a prophet visited King Ahab of Israel and said, “This is what the Lord says, ‘Do you see this huge army? Look, I am going to hand it over to you this very day. Then you will know that I am the Lord.’”
1KI 20:14 Ahab asked, “By whom will this be accomplished?” He answered, “This is what the Lord says, ‘By the servants of the district governors.’” Ahab asked, “Who will launch the attack?” He answered, “You will.”
1KI 20:15 So Ahab assembled the 232 servants of the district governors. After that he assembled all the Israelite army, numbering 7,000.
1KI 20:16 They marched out at noon, while Ben Hadad and the thirty-two kings allied with him were drinking heavily in their quarters.
1KI 20:17 The servants of the district governors led the march. When Ben Hadad sent messengers, they reported back to him, “Men are marching out of Samaria.”
1KI 20:18 He ordered, “Whether they come in peace or to do battle, take them alive.”
1KI 20:19 They marched out of the city with the servants of the district governors in the lead and the army behind them.
1KI 20:20 Each one struck down an enemy soldier; the Syrians fled and Israel chased them. King Ben Hadad of Syria escaped on horseback with some horsemen.
1KI 20:21 Then the king of Israel marched out and struck down the horses and chariots; he thoroughly defeated Syria.
1KI 20:22 The prophet visited the king of Israel and instructed him, “Go, fortify your defenses. Determine what you must do, for in the spring the king of Syria will attack you.”
1KI 20:23 Now the advisers of the king of Syria said to him: “Their God is a god of the mountains. That’s why they overpowered us. But if we fight them in the plains, we will certainly overpower them.
1KI 20:24 So do this: Dismiss the kings from their command, and replace them with military commanders.
1KI 20:25 Muster an army like the one you lost, with the same number of horses and chariots. Then we will fight them in the plains; we will certainly overpower them.” He approved their plan and did as they advised.
1KI 20:26 In the spring Ben Hadad mustered the Syrian army and marched to Aphek to fight Israel.
1KI 20:27 When the Israelites had mustered and had received their supplies, they marched out to face them in battle. When the Israelites deployed opposite them, they were like two small flocks of goats, but the Syrians filled the land.
1KI 20:28 The prophet visited the king of Israel and said, “This is what the Lord says: ‘Because the Syrians said, “The Lord is a god of the mountains and not a god of the valleys,” I will hand over to you this entire huge army. Then you will know that I am the Lord.’”
1KI 20:29 The armies were deployed opposite each other for seven days. On the seventh day the battle began, and the Israelites killed 100,000 Syrian foot soldiers in one day.
1KI 20:30 The remaining 27,000 ran to Aphek and went into the city, but the wall fell on them. Now Ben Hadad ran into the city and hid in an inner room.
1KI 20:31 His advisers said to him, “Look, we have heard that the kings of the Israelite dynasty are kind. Allow us to put sackcloth around our waists and ropes on our heads and surrender to the king of Israel. Maybe he will spare our lives.”
1KI 20:32 So they put sackcloth around their waists and ropes on their heads and went to the king of Israel. They said, “Your servant Ben Hadad says, ‘Please let me live!’” Ahab replied, “Is he still alive? He is my brother.”
1KI 20:33 The men took this as a good omen and quickly accepted his offer, saying, “Ben Hadad is your brother.” Ahab then said, “Go, get him.” So Ben Hadad came out to him, and Ahab pulled him up into his chariot.
1KI 20:34 Ben Hadad said, “I will return the cities my father took from your father. You may set up markets in Damascus, just as my father did in Samaria.” Ahab then said, “I want to make a treaty with you before I dismiss you.” So he made a treaty with him and then dismissed him.
1KI 20:35 One of the members of the prophetic guild, speaking with divine authority, ordered his companion, “Wound me!” But the man refused to wound him.
1KI 20:36 So the prophet said to him, “Because you have disobeyed the Lord, as soon as you leave me a lion will kill you.” When he left him, a lion attacked and killed him.
1KI 20:37 He found another man and said, “Wound me!” So the man wounded him severely.
1KI 20:38 The prophet then went and stood by the road, waiting for the king. He also disguised himself by putting a bandage down over his eyes.
1KI 20:39 When the king passed by, he called out to the king, “Your servant went out into the heat of the battle, and then a man turned aside and brought me a prisoner. He told me, ‘Guard this prisoner. If he ends up missing for any reason, you will pay with your life or with a talent of silver.’
1KI 20:40 Well, it just so happened that while your servant was doing this and that, he disappeared.” The king of Israel said to him, “Your punishment is already determined by your own testimony.”
1KI 20:41 The prophet quickly removed the bandage from his eyes and the king of Israel recognized he was one of the prophets.
1KI 20:42 The prophet then said to him, “This is what the Lord says, ‘Because you released a man I had determined should die, you will pay with your life and your people will suffer instead of his people.’”
1KI 20:43 The king of Israel went home to Samaria bitter and angry.
1KI 21:1 After this the following episode took place. Naboth the Jezreelite owned a vineyard in Jezreel adjacent to the palace of King Ahab of Samaria.
1KI 21:2 Ahab said to Naboth, “Give me your vineyard so I can make a vegetable garden out of it, for it is adjacent to my palace. I will give you an even better vineyard in its place, or if you prefer, I will pay you silver for it.”
1KI 21:3 But Naboth replied to Ahab, “The Lord forbid that I should sell you my ancestral inheritance.”
1KI 21:4 So Ahab went into his palace, bitter and angry that Naboth the Jezreelite had said, “I will not sell to you my ancestral inheritance.” He lay down on his bed, pouted, and would not eat.
1KI 21:5 Then his wife Jezebel came in and said to him, “Why do you have a bitter attitude and refuse to eat?”
1KI 21:6 He answered her, “While I was talking to Naboth the Jezreelite, I said to him, ‘Sell me your vineyard for silver, or if you prefer, I will give you another vineyard in its place.’ But he said, ‘I will not sell you my vineyard.’”
1KI 21:7 His wife Jezebel said to him, “You are the king of Israel! Get up, eat some food, and have a good time. I will get the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite for you.”
1KI 21:8 She wrote out orders, signed Ahab’s name to them, and sealed them with his seal. She then sent the orders to the leaders and to the nobles who lived in Naboth’s city.
1KI 21:9 This is what she wrote: “Observe a time of fasting and seat Naboth in front of the people.
1KI 21:10 Also seat two villains opposite him and have them testify, ‘You cursed God and the king.’ Then take him out and stone him to death.”
1KI 21:11 The men of the city, the leaders and the nobles who lived there, followed the written orders Jezebel had sent them.
1KI 21:12 They observed a time of fasting and put Naboth in front of the people.
1KI 21:13 The two villains arrived and sat opposite him. Then the villains testified against Naboth right before the people, saying, “Naboth cursed God and the king.” So they dragged him outside the city and stoned him to death.
1KI 21:14 Then they reported to Jezebel, “Naboth has been stoned to death.”
1KI 21:15 When Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned to death, she said to Ahab, “Get up, take possession of the vineyard Naboth the Jezreelite refused to sell you for silver, for Naboth is no longer alive; he’s dead.”
1KI 21:16 When Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, he got up and went down to take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.
1KI 21:17 The Lord told Elijah the Tishbite:
1KI 21:18 “Get up, go down and meet King Ahab of Israel who lives in Samaria. He is at the vineyard of Naboth; he has gone down there to take possession of it.
1KI 21:19 Say to him, ‘This is what the Lord says: “Haven’t you committed murder and taken possession of the property of the deceased?”’ Then say to him, ‘This is what the Lord says: “In the spot where dogs licked up Naboth’s blood they will also lick up your blood – yes, yours!”’”
1KI 21:20 When Elijah arrived, Ahab said to him, “So, you have found me, my enemy!” Elijah replied, “I have found you, because you are committed to doing evil in the sight of the Lord.
1KI 21:21 The Lord says, ‘Look, I am ready to bring disaster on you. I will destroy you and cut off every last male belonging to Ahab in Israel, including even the weak and incapacitated.
1KI 21:22 I will make your dynasty like those of Jeroboam son of Nebat and Baasha son of Ahijah because you angered me and made Israel sin.’
1KI 21:23 The Lord says this about Jezebel, ‘Dogs will devour Jezebel by the outer wall of Jezreel.’
1KI 21:24 As for Ahab’s family, dogs will eat the ones who die in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat the ones who die in the country.”
1KI 21:25 (There had never been anyone like Ahab, who was firmly committed to doing evil in the sight of the Lord, urged on by his wife Jezebel.
1KI 21:26 He was so wicked he worshiped the disgusting idols, just like the Amorites whom the Lord had driven out from before the Israelites.)
1KI 21:27 When Ahab heard these words, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and fasted. He slept in sackcloth and walked around dejected.
1KI 21:28 The Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite,
1KI 21:29 “Have you noticed how Ahab shows remorse before me? Because he shows remorse before me, I will not bring disaster on his dynasty during his lifetime, but during the reign of his son.”
1KI 22:1 There was no war between Syria and Israel for three years.
1KI 22:2 In the third year King Jehoshaphat of Judah came down to visit the king of Israel.
1KI 22:3 The king of Israel said to his servants, “Surely you recognize that Ramoth Gilead belongs to us, though we are hesitant to reclaim it from the king of Syria.”
1KI 22:4 Then he said to Jehoshaphat, “Will you go with me to attack Ramoth Gilead?” Jehoshaphat replied to the king of Israel, “I will support you; my army and horses are at your disposal.”
1KI 22:5 Then Jehoshaphat added, “First seek an oracle from the Lord.”
1KI 22:6 So the king of Israel assembled about four hundred prophets and asked them, “Should I attack Ramoth Gilead or not?” They said, “Attack! The sovereign one will hand it over to the king.”
1KI 22:7 But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there not a prophet of the Lord still here, that we may ask him?”
1KI 22:8 The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat, “There is still one man through whom we can seek the Lord’s will. But I despise him because he does not prophesy prosperity for me, but disaster. His name is Micaiah son of Imlah. Jehoshaphat said, “The king should not say such things.”
1KI 22:9 The king of Israel summoned an official and said, “Quickly bring Micaiah son of Imlah.”
1KI 22:10 Now the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah were sitting on their respective thrones, dressed in their robes, at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. All the prophets were prophesying before them.
1KI 22:11 Zedekiah son of Kenaanah made iron horns and said, “This is what the Lord says, ‘With these you will gore Syria until they are destroyed.’”
1KI 22:12 All the prophets were prophesying the same, saying, “Attack Ramoth Gilead! You will succeed; the Lord will hand it over to the king.”
1KI 22:13 Now the messenger who went to summon Micaiah said to him, “Look, the prophets are in complete agreement that the king will succeed. Your words must agree with theirs; you must predict success.”
1KI 22:14 But Micaiah said, “As certainly as the Lord lives, I will say what the Lord tells me to say.”
1KI 22:15 When he came before the king, the king asked him, “Micaiah, should we attack Ramoth Gilead or not?” He answered him, “Attack! You will succeed; the Lord will hand it over to the king.”
1KI 22:16 The king said to him, “How many times must I make you solemnly promise in the name of the Lord to tell me only the truth?”
1KI 22:17 Micaiah said, “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep that have no shepherd. Then the Lord said, ‘They have no master. They should go home in peace.’”
1KI 22:18 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Didn’t I tell you he does not prophesy prosperity for me, but disaster?”
1KI 22:19 Micaiah said, “That being the case, hear the word of the Lord. I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, with all the heavenly assembly standing on his right and on his left.
1KI 22:20 The Lord said, ‘Who will deceive Ahab, so he will attack Ramoth Gilead and die there?’ One said this and another that.
1KI 22:21 Then a spirit stepped forward and stood before the Lord. He said, ‘I will deceive him.’ The Lord asked him, ‘How?’
1KI 22:22 He replied, ‘I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets.’ The Lord said, ‘Deceive and overpower him. Go out and do as you have proposed.’
1KI 22:23 So now, look, the Lord has placed a lying spirit in the mouths of all these prophets of yours; but the Lord has decreed disaster for you.”
1KI 22:24 Zedekiah son of Kenaanah approached, hit Micaiah on the jaw, and said, “Which way did the Lord’s spirit go when he went from me to speak to you?”
1KI 22:25 Micaiah replied, “Look, you will see in the day when you go into an inner room to hide.”
1KI 22:26 Then the king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the city official and Joash the king’s son.
1KI 22:27 Say, ‘This is what the king says, “Put this man in prison. Give him only a little bread and water until I safely return.”’”
1KI 22:28 Micaiah said, “If you really do safely return, then the Lord has not spoken through me.” Then he added, “Take note, all you people.”
1KI 22:29 The king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah attacked Ramoth Gilead.
1KI 22:30 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and then enter into the battle; but you wear your royal robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and then entered into the battle.
1KI 22:31 Now the king of Syria had ordered his thirty-two chariot commanders, “Do not fight common soldiers or high-ranking officers; fight only the king of Israel.”
1KI 22:32 When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “He must be the king of Israel.” So they turned and attacked him, but Jehoshaphat cried out.
1KI 22:33 When the chariot commanders realized he was not the king of Israel, they turned away from him.
1KI 22:34 Now an archer shot an arrow at random, and it struck the king of Israel between the plates of his armor. The king ordered his charioteer, “Turn around and take me from the battle line, because I’m wounded.”
1KI 22:35 While the battle raged throughout the day, the king stood propped up in his chariot opposite the Syrians. He died in the evening; the blood from the wound ran down into the bottom of the chariot.
1KI 22:36 As the sun was setting, a cry went through the camp, “Each one should return to his city and to his homeland.”
1KI 22:37 So the king died and was taken to Samaria, where they buried him.
1KI 22:38 They washed off the chariot at the pool of Samaria (this was where the prostitutes bathed); dogs licked his blood, just as the Lord had said would happen.
1KI 22:39 The rest of the events of Ahab’s reign, including a record of his accomplishments and how he built a luxurious palace and various cities, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
1KI 22:40 Ahab passed away. His son Ahaziah replaced him as king.
1KI 22:41 In the fourth year of King Ahab’s reign over Israel, Asa’s son Jehoshaphat became king over Judah.
1KI 22:42 Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he became king and he reigned for twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi.
1KI 22:43 He followed in his father Asa’s footsteps and was careful to do what the Lord approved. However, the high places were not eliminated; the people continued to offer sacrifices and burn incense on the high places.
1KI 22:44 Jehoshaphat was also at peace with the king of Israel.
1KI 22:45 The rest of the events of Jehoshaphat’s reign, including his successes and military exploits, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
1KI 22:46 He removed from the land any male cultic prostitutes who had managed to survive the reign of his father Asa.
1KI 22:47 There was no king in Edom at this time; a governor ruled.
1KI 22:48 Jehoshaphat built a fleet of large merchant ships to travel to Ophir for gold, but they never made the voyage because they were shipwrecked in Ezion Geber.
1KI 22:49 Then Ahaziah son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, “Let my sailors join yours in the fleet,” but Jehoshaphat refused.
1KI 22:50 Jehoshaphat passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of his ancestor David. His son Jehoram replaced him as king.
1KI 22:51 In the seventeenth year of King Jehoshaphat’s reign over Judah, Ahab’s son Ahaziah became king over Israel in Samaria. He ruled for two years over Israel.
1KI 22:52 He did evil in the sight of the Lord and followed in the footsteps of his father and mother; like Jeroboam son of Nebat, he encouraged Israel to sin.
1KI 22:53 He worshiped and bowed down to Baal, angering the Lord God of Israel just as his father had done.
2KI 1:1 After Ahab died, Moab rebelled against Israel.
2KI 1:2 Ahaziah fell through a window lattice in his upper chamber in Samaria and was injured. He sent messengers with these orders, “Go, ask Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron, if I will survive this injury.”
2KI 1:3 But the Lord’s angelic messenger told Elijah the Tishbite, “Get up, go to meet the messengers from the king of Samaria. Say this to them: ‘You must think there is no God in Israel! That explains why you are on your way to seek an oracle from Baal Zebub the god of Ekron.
2KI 1:4 Therefore this is what the Lord says, “You will not leave the bed you lie on, for you will certainly die!”’” So Elijah went on his way.
2KI 1:5 When the messengers returned to the king, he asked them, “Why have you returned?”
2KI 1:6 They replied, “A man came up to meet us. He told us, “Go back to the king who sent you and tell him, ‘This is what the Lord says: “You must think there is no God in Israel! That explains why you are sending for an oracle from Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron. Therefore you will not leave the bed you lie on, for you will certainly die.”’”
2KI 1:7 The king asked them, “Describe the appearance of this man who came up to meet you and told you these things.”
2KI 1:8 They replied, “He was a hairy man and had a leather belt tied around his waist.” The king said, “He is Elijah the Tishbite.”
2KI 1:9 The king sent a captain and his fifty soldiers to retrieve Elijah. The captain went up to him, while he was sitting on the top of a hill. He told him, “Prophet, the king says, ‘Come down!’”
2KI 1:10 Elijah replied to the captain, “If I am indeed a prophet, may fire come down from the sky and consume you and your fifty soldiers!” Fire then came down from the sky and consumed him and his fifty soldiers.
2KI 1:11 The king sent another captain and his fifty soldiers to retrieve Elijah. He went up and told him, “Prophet, this is what the king says, ‘Come down at once!’”
2KI 1:12 Elijah replied to them, “If I am indeed a prophet, may fire come down from the sky and consume you and your fifty soldiers!” Fire from God came down from the sky and consumed him and his fifty soldiers.
2KI 1:13 The king sent a third captain and his fifty soldiers. This third captain went up and fell on his knees before Elijah. He begged for mercy, “Prophet, please have respect for my life and for the lives of these fifty servants of yours.
2KI 1:14 Indeed, fire came down from the sky and consumed the two captains who came before me, along with their men. So now, please have respect for my life.”
2KI 1:15 The Lord’s angelic messenger said to Elijah, “Go down with him. Don’t be afraid of him.” So he got up and went down with him to the king.
2KI 1:16 Elijah said to the king, “This is what the Lord says, ‘You sent messengers to seek an oracle from Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron. You must think there is no God in Israel from whom you can seek an oracle! Therefore you will not leave the bed you lie on, for you will certainly die.’”
2KI 1:17 He died just as the Lord had prophesied through Elijah. In the second year of the reign of King Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat over Judah, Ahaziah’s brother Jehoram replaced him as king of Israel, because he had no son.
2KI 1:18 The rest of the events of Ahaziah’s reign, including his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 2:1 Just before the Lord took Elijah up to heaven in a windstorm, Elijah and Elisha were traveling from Gilgal.
2KI 2:2 Elijah told Elisha, “Stay here, for the Lord has sent me to Bethel.” But Elisha said, “As certainly as the Lord lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel.
2KI 2:3 Some members of the prophetic guild in Bethel came out to Elisha and said, “Do you know that today the Lord is going to take your master from you?” He answered, “Yes, I know. Be quiet.”
2KI 2:4 Elijah said to him, “Elisha, stay here, for the Lord has sent me to Jericho.” But he replied, “As certainly as the Lord lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So they went to Jericho.
2KI 2:5 Some members of the prophetic guild in Jericho approached Elisha and said, “Do you know that today the Lord is going to take your master from you?” He answered, “Yes, I know. Be quiet.”
2KI 2:6 Elijah said to him, “Stay here, for the Lord has sent me to the Jordan.” But he replied, “As certainly as the Lord lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So they traveled on together.
2KI 2:7 The fifty members of the prophetic guild went and stood opposite them at a distance, while Elijah and Elisha stood by the Jordan.
2KI 2:8 Elijah took his cloak, folded it up, and hit the water with it. The water divided, and the two of them crossed over on dry ground.
2KI 2:9 When they had crossed over, Elijah said to Elisha, “What can I do for you, before I am taken away from you?” Elisha answered, “May I receive a double portion of the prophetic spirit that energizes you.”
2KI 2:10 Elijah replied, “That’s a difficult request! If you see me taken from you, may it be so, but if you don’t, it will not happen.”
2KI 2:11 As they were walking along and talking, suddenly a fiery chariot pulled by fiery horses appeared. They went between Elijah and Elisha, and Elijah went up to heaven in a windstorm.
2KI 2:12 While Elisha was watching, he was crying out, “My father, my father! The chariot and horsemen of Israel!” Then he could no longer see him. He grabbed his clothes and tore them in two.
2KI 2:13 He picked up Elijah’s cloak, which had fallen off him, and went back and stood on the shore of the Jordan.
2KI 2:14 He took the cloak that had fallen off Elijah, hit the water with it, and said, “Where is the Lord, the God of Elijah?” When he hit the water, it divided and Elisha crossed over.
2KI 2:15 When the members of the prophetic guild in Jericho, who were standing at a distance, saw him do this, they said, “The spirit that energized Elijah rests upon Elisha.” They went to meet him and bowed down to the ground before him.
2KI 2:16 They said to him, “Look, there are fifty capable men with your servants. Let them go and look for your master, for the wind sent from the Lord may have carried him away and dropped him on one of the hills or in one of the valleys.” But Elisha replied, “Don’t send them out.”
2KI 2:17 But they were so insistent, he became embarrassed. So he said, “Send them out.” They sent the fifty men out and they looked for three days, but could not find Elijah.
2KI 2:18 When they came back, Elisha was staying in Jericho. He said to them, “Didn’t I tell you, ‘Don’t go’?”
2KI 2:19 The men of the city said to Elisha, “Look, the city has a good location, as our master can see. But the water is bad and the land doesn’t produce crops.”
2KI 2:20 Elisha said, “Get me a new jar and put some salt in it.” So they got it.
2KI 2:21 He went out to the spring and threw the salt in. Then he said, “This is what the Lord says, ‘I have purified this water. It will no longer cause death or fail to produce crops.”
2KI 2:22 The water has been pure to this very day, just as Elisha prophesied.
2KI 2:23 He went up from there to Bethel. As he was traveling up the road, some young boys came out of the city and made fun of him, saying, “Go on up, baldy! Go on up, baldy!”
2KI 2:24 When he turned around and saw them, he called God’s judgment down on them. Two female bears came out of the woods and ripped forty-two of the boys to pieces.
2KI 2:25 From there he traveled to Mount Carmel and then back to Samaria.
2KI 3:1 In the eighteenth year of King Jehoshaphat’s reign over Judah, Ahab’s son Jehoram became king over Israel in Samaria; he ruled for twelve years.
2KI 3:2 He did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not to the same degree as his father and mother. He did remove the sacred pillar of Baal that his father had made.
2KI 3:3 Yet he persisted in the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, who encouraged Israel to sin; he did not turn from them.
2KI 3:4 Now King Mesha of Moab was a sheep breeder. He would send as tribute to the king of Israel 100,000 male lambs and the wool of 100,000 rams.
2KI 3:5 When Ahab died, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
2KI 3:6 At that time King Jehoram left Samaria and assembled all Israel for war.
2KI 3:7 He sent this message to King Jehoshaphat of Judah: “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you fight with me against Moab?” Jehoshaphat replied, “I will join you in the campaign; my army and horses are at your disposal.”
2KI 3:8 He then asked, “Which invasion route are we going to take?” Jehoram answered, “By the road through the Desert of Edom.”
2KI 3:9 So the kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom set out together. They wandered around on the road for seven days and finally ran out of water for the men and animals they had with them.
2KI 3:10 The king of Israel said, “Oh no! Certainly the Lord has summoned these three kings so that he can hand them over to the king of Moab!”
2KI 3:11 Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there no prophet of the Lord here that we might seek the Lord’s direction?” One of the servants of the king of Israel answered, “Elisha son of Shapat is here; he used to be Elijah’s servant.”
2KI 3:12 Jehoshaphat said, “The Lord speaks through him.” So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to visit him.
2KI 3:13 Elisha said to the king of Israel, “Why are you here? Go to your father’s prophets or your mother’s prophets!” The king of Israel replied to him, “No, for the Lord is the one who summoned these three kings so that he can hand them over to Moab.”
2KI 3:14 Elisha said, “As certainly as the Lord who rules over all lives (whom I serve), if I did not respect King Jehoshaphat of Judah, I would not pay attention to you or acknowledge you.
2KI 3:15 But now, get me a musician.” When the musician played, the Lord energized him,
2KI 3:16 and he said, “This is what the Lord says, ‘Make many cisterns in this valley,’
2KI 3:17 for this is what the Lord says, ‘You will not feel any wind or see any rain, but this valley will be full of water and you and your cattle and animals will drink.’
2KI 3:18 This is an easy task for the Lord; he will also hand Moab over to you.
2KI 3:19 You will defeat every fortified city and every important city. You must chop down every productive tree, stop up all the springs, and cover all the cultivated land with stones.”
2KI 3:20 Sure enough, the next morning, at the time of the morning sacrifice, water came flowing down from Edom and filled the land.
2KI 3:21 Now all Moab had heard that the kings were attacking, so everyone old enough to fight was mustered and placed at the border.
2KI 3:22 When they got up early the next morning, the sun was shining on the water. To the Moabites, who were some distance away, the water looked red like blood.
2KI 3:23 The Moabites said, “It’s blood! The kings are totally destroyed! They have struck one another down! Now, Moab, seize the plunder!”
2KI 3:24 When they approached the Israelite camp, the Israelites rose up and struck down the Moabites, who then ran from them. The Israelites thoroughly defeated Moab.
2KI 3:25 They tore down the cities and each man threw a stone into every cultivated field until they were covered. They stopped up every spring and chopped down every productive tree. Only Kir Hareseth was left intact, but the slingers surrounded it and attacked it.
2KI 3:26 When the king of Moab realized he was losing the battle, he and 700 swordsmen tried to break through and attack the king of Edom, but they failed.
2KI 3:27 So he took his firstborn son, who was to succeed him as king, and offered him up as a burnt sacrifice on the wall. There was an outburst of divine anger against Israel, so they broke off the attack and returned to their homeland.
2KI 4:1 Now a wife of one of the prophets appealed to Elisha for help, saying, “Your servant, my husband is dead. You know that your servant was a loyal follower of the Lord. Now the creditor is coming to take away my two boys to be his servants.”
2KI 4:2 Elisha said to her, “What can I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?” She answered, “Your servant has nothing in the house except a small jar of olive oil.”
2KI 4:3 He said, “Go and ask all your neighbors for empty containers. Get as many as you can.
2KI 4:4 Go and close the door behind you and your sons. Pour the olive oil into all the containers; set aside each one when you have filled it.”
2KI 4:5 So she left him and closed the door behind her and her sons. As they were bringing the containers to her, she was pouring the olive oil.
2KI 4:6 When the containers were full, she said to one of her sons, “Bring me another container.” But he answered her, “There are no more.” Then the olive oil stopped flowing.
2KI 4:7 She went and told the prophet. He said, “Go, sell the olive oil. Repay your creditor, and then you and your sons can live off the rest of the profit.”
2KI 4:8 One day Elisha traveled to Shunem, where a prominent woman lived. She insisted that he stop for a meal. So whenever he was passing through, he would stop in there for a meal.
2KI 4:9 She said to her husband, “Look, I’m sure that the man who regularly passes through here is a very special prophet.
2KI 4:10 Let’s make a small private upper room and furnish it with a bed, table, chair, and lamp. When he visits us, he can stay there.”
2KI 4:11 One day Elisha came for a visit; he went into the upper room and rested.
2KI 4:12 He told his servant Gehazi, “Ask the Shunammite woman to come here.” So he did so and she came to him.
2KI 4:13 Elisha said to Gehazi, “Tell her, ‘Look, you have treated us with such great respect. What can I do for you? Can I put in a good word for you with the king or the commander of the army?’” She replied, “I’m quite secure.”
2KI 4:14 So he asked Gehazi, “What can I do for her?” Gehazi replied, “She has no son, and her husband is old.”
2KI 4:15 Elisha told him, “Ask her to come here.” So he did so and she came and stood in the doorway.
2KI 4:16 He said, “About this time next year you will be holding a son.” She said, “No, my master! O prophet, do not lie to your servant!”
2KI 4:17 The woman did conceive, and at the specified time the next year she gave birth to a son, just as Elisha had told her.
2KI 4:18 The boy grew and one day he went out to see his father who was with the harvest workers.
2KI 4:19 He said to his father, “My head! My head!” His father told a servant, “Carry him to his mother.”
2KI 4:20 So he picked him up and took him to his mother. He sat on her lap until noon and then died.
2KI 4:21 She went up and laid him down on the prophet’s bed. She shut the door behind her and left.
2KI 4:22 She called to her husband, “Send me one of the servants and one of the donkeys, so I can go see the prophet quickly and then return.”
2KI 4:23 He said, “Why do you want to go see him today? It is not the new moon or the Sabbath.” She said, “Everything’s fine.”
2KI 4:24 She saddled the donkey and told her servant, “Lead on. Do not stop unless I say so.”
2KI 4:25 So she went to visit the prophet at Mount Carmel. When he saw her at a distance, he said to his servant Gehazi, “Look, it’s the Shunammite woman.
2KI 4:26 Now, run to meet her and ask her, ‘Are you well? Are your husband and the boy well?’” She told Gehazi, “Everything’s fine.”
2KI 4:27 But when she reached the prophet on the mountain, she grabbed hold of his feet. Gehazi came near to push her away, but the prophet said, “Leave her alone, for she is very upset. The Lord has kept the matter hidden from me; he didn’t tell me about it.”
2KI 4:28 She said, “Did I ask my master for a son? Didn’t I say, ‘Don’t mislead me?’”
2KI 4:29 Elisha told Gehazi, “Tuck your robes into your belt, take my staff, and go! Don’t stop to exchange greetings with anyone! Place my staff on the child’s face.”
2KI 4:30 The mother of the child said, “As certainly as the Lord lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So Elisha got up and followed her back.
2KI 4:31 Now Gehazi went on ahead of them. He placed the staff on the child’s face, but there was no sound or response. When he came back to Elisha he told him, “The child did not wake up.”
2KI 4:32 When Elisha arrived at the house, there was the child lying dead on his bed.
2KI 4:33 He went in by himself and closed the door. Then he prayed to the Lord.
2KI 4:34 He got up on the bed and spread his body out over the boy; he put his mouth on the boy’s mouth, his eyes over the boy’s eyes, and the palms of his hands against the boy’s palms. He bent down over him, and the boy’s skin grew warm.
2KI 4:35 Elisha went back and walked around in the house. Then he got up on the bed again and bent down over him. The child sneezed seven times and opened his eyes.
2KI 4:36 Elisha called to Gehazi and said, “Get the Shunammite woman.” So he did so and she came to him. He said to her, “Take your son.”
2KI 4:37 She came in, fell at his feet, and bowed down. Then she picked up her son and left.
2KI 4:38 Now Elisha went back to Gilgal, while there was famine in the land. Some of the prophets were visiting him and he told his servant, “Put the big pot on the fire and boil some stew for the prophets.”
2KI 4:39 Someone went out to the field to gather some herbs and found a wild vine. He picked some of its fruit, enough to fill up the fold of his robe. He came back, cut it up, and threw the slices into the stew pot, not knowing they were harmful.
2KI 4:40 The stew was poured out for the men to eat. When they ate some of the stew, they cried out, “Death is in the pot, O prophet!” They could not eat it.
2KI 4:41 He said, “Get some flour.” Then he threw it into the pot and said, “Now pour some out for the men so they may eat.” There was no longer anything harmful in the pot.
2KI 4:42 Now a man from Baal Shalisha brought some food for the prophet – twenty loaves of bread made from the firstfruits of the barley harvest, as well as fresh ears of grain. Elisha said, “Set it before the people so they may eat.”
2KI 4:43 But his attendant said, “How can I feed a hundred men with this?” He replied, “Set it before the people so they may eat, for this is what the Lord says, ‘They will eat and have some left over.’”
2KI 4:44 So he set it before them; they ate and had some left over, just as the Lord predicted.
2KI 5:1 Now Naaman, the commander of the king of Syria’s army, was esteemed and respected by his master, for through him the Lord had given Syria military victories. But this great warrior had a skin disease.
2KI 5:2 Raiding parties went out from Syria and took captive from the land of Israel a young girl, who became a servant to Naaman’s wife.
2KI 5:3 She told her mistress, “If only my master were in the presence of the prophet who is in Samaria! Then he would cure him of his skin disease.”
2KI 5:4 Naaman went and told his master what the girl from the land of Israel had said.
2KI 5:5 The king of Syria said, “Go! I will send a letter to the king of Israel.” So Naaman went, taking with him ten talents of silver, six thousand shekels of gold, and ten suits of clothes.
2KI 5:6 He brought the letter to king of Israel. It read: “This is a letter of introduction for my servant Naaman, whom I have sent to be cured of his skin disease.”
2KI 5:7 When the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his clothes and said, “Am I God? Can I kill or restore life? Why does he ask me to cure a man of his skin disease? Certainly you must see that he is looking for an excuse to fight me!”
2KI 5:8 When Elisha the prophet heard that the king had torn his clothes, he sent this message to the king, “Why did you tear your clothes? Send him to me so he may know there is a prophet in Israel.”
2KI 5:9 So Naaman came with his horses and chariots and stood in the doorway of Elisha’s house.
2KI 5:10 Elisha sent out a messenger who told him, “Go and wash seven times in the Jordan; your skin will be restored and you will be healed.”
2KI 5:11 Naaman went away angry. He said, “Look, I thought for sure he would come out, stand there, invoke the name of the Lord his God, wave his hand over the area, and cure the skin disease.
2KI 5:12 The rivers of Damascus, the Abana and Pharpar, are better than any of the waters of Israel! Could I not wash in them and be healed?” So he turned around and went away angry.
2KI 5:13 His servants approached and said to him, “O master, if the prophet had told you to do some difficult task, you would have been willing to do it. It seems you should be happy that he simply said, “Wash and you will be healed.”
2KI 5:14 So he went down and dipped in the Jordan seven times, as the prophet had instructed. His skin became as smooth as a young child’s and he was healed.
2KI 5:15 He and his entire entourage returned to the prophet. Naaman came and stood before him. He said, “For sure I know that there is no God in all the earth except in Israel! Now, please accept a gift from your servant.”
2KI 5:16 But Elisha replied, “As certainly as the Lord lives (whom I serve), I will take nothing from you.” Naaman insisted that he take it, but he refused.
2KI 5:17 Naaman said, “If not, then please give your servant a load of dirt, enough for a pair of mules to carry, for your servant will never again offer a burnt offering or sacrifice to a god other than the Lord.
2KI 5:18 May the Lord forgive your servant for this one thing: When my master enters the temple of Rimmon to worship, and he leans on my arm and I bow down in the temple of Rimmon, may the Lord forgive your servant for this.”
2KI 5:19 Elisha said to him, “Go in peace.” When he had gone a short distance,
2KI 5:20 Gehazi, the prophet Elisha’s servant, thought, “Look, my master did not accept what this Syrian Naaman offered him. As certainly as the Lord lives, I will run after him and accept something from him.”
2KI 5:21 So Gehazi ran after Naaman. When Naaman saw someone running after him, he got down from his chariot to meet him and asked, “Is everything all right?”
2KI 5:22 He answered, “Everything is fine. My master sent me with this message, ‘Look, two servants of the prophets just arrived from the Ephraimite hill country. Please give them a talent of silver and two suits of clothes.’”
2KI 5:23 Naaman said, “Please accept two talents of silver. He insisted, and tied up two talents of silver in two bags, along with two suits of clothes. He gave them to two of his servants and they carried them for Gehazi.
2KI 5:24 When he arrived at the hill, he took them from the servants and put them in the house. Then he sent the men on their way.
2KI 5:25 When he came and stood before his master, Elisha asked him, “Where have you been, Gehazi?” He answered, “Your servant hasn’t been anywhere.”
2KI 5:26 Elisha replied, “I was there in spirit when a man turned and got down from his chariot to meet you. This is not the proper time to accept silver or to accept clothes, olive groves, vineyards, sheep, cattle, and male and female servants.
2KI 5:27 Therefore Naaman’s skin disease will afflict you and your descendants forever!” When Gehazi went out from his presence, his skin was as white as snow.
2KI 6:1 Some of the prophets said to Elisha, “Look, the place where we meet with you is too cramped for us.
2KI 6:2 Let’s go to the Jordan. Each of us will get a log from there and we will build a meeting place for ourselves there.” He said, “Go.”
2KI 6:3 One of them said, “Please come along with your servants.” He replied, “All right, I’ll come.”
2KI 6:4 So he went with them. When they arrived at the Jordan, they started cutting down trees.
2KI 6:5 As one of them was felling a log, the ax head dropped into the water. He shouted, “Oh no, my master! It was borrowed!”
2KI 6:6 The prophet asked, “Where did it drop in?” When he showed him the spot, Elisha cut off a branch, threw it in at that spot, and made the ax head float.
2KI 6:7 He said, “Lift it out.” So he reached out his hand and grabbed it.
2KI 6:8 Now the king of Syria was at war with Israel. He consulted his advisers, who said, “Invade at such and such a place.”
2KI 6:9 But the prophet sent this message to the king of Israel, “Make sure you don’t pass through this place because Syria is invading there.”
2KI 6:10 So the king of Israel sent a message to the place the prophet had pointed out, warning it to be on its guard. This happened on several occasions.
2KI 6:11 This made the king of Syria upset. So he summoned his advisers and said to them, “One of us must be helping the king of Israel.”
2KI 6:12 One of his advisers said, “No, my master, O king. The prophet Elisha who lives in Israel keeps telling the king of Israel the things you say in your bedroom.”
2KI 6:13 The king ordered, “Go, find out where he is, so I can send some men to capture him.” The king was told, “He is in Dothan.”
2KI 6:14 So he sent horses and chariots there, along with a good-sized army. They arrived during the night and surrounded the city.
2KI 6:15 The prophet’s attendant got up early in the morning. When he went outside there was an army surrounding the city, along with horses and chariots. He said to Elisha, “Oh no, my master! What will we do?”
2KI 6:16 He replied, “Don’t be afraid, for our side outnumbers them.”
2KI 6:17 Then Elisha prayed, “O Lord, open his eyes so he can see.” The Lord opened the servant’s eyes and he saw that the hill was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha.
2KI 6:18 As they approached him, Elisha prayed to the Lord, “Strike these people with blindness.” The Lord struck them with blindness as Elisha requested.
2KI 6:19 Then Elisha said to them, “This is not the right road or city. Follow me, and I will lead you to the man you’re looking for.” He led them to Samaria.
2KI 6:20 When they had entered Samaria, Elisha said, “O Lord, open their eyes, so they can see.” The Lord opened their eyes and they saw that they were in the middle of Samaria.
2KI 6:21 When the king of Israel saw them, he asked Elisha, “Should I strike them down, my master?”
2KI 6:22 He replied, “Do not strike them down! You did not capture them with your sword or bow, so what gives you the right to strike them down? Give them some food and water, so they can eat and drink and then go back to their master.”
2KI 6:23 So he threw a big banquet for them and they ate and drank. Then he sent them back to their master. After that no Syrian raiding parties again invaded the land of Israel.
2KI 6:24 Later King Ben Hadad of Syria assembled his entire army and attacked and besieged Samaria.
2KI 6:25 Samaria’s food supply ran out. They laid siege to it so long that a donkey’s head was selling for eighty shekels of silver and a quarter of a kab of dove’s droppings for five shekels of silver.
2KI 6:26 While the king of Israel was passing by on the city wall, a woman shouted to him, “Help us, my master, O king!”
2KI 6:27 He replied, “No, let the Lord help you. How can I help you? The threshing floor and winepress are empty.”
2KI 6:28 Then the king asked her, “What’s your problem?” She answered, “This woman said to me, ‘Hand over your son; we’ll eat him today and then eat my son tomorrow.’
2KI 6:29 So we boiled my son and ate him. Then I said to her the next day, ‘Hand over your son and we’ll eat him.’ But she hid her son!”
2KI 6:30 When the king heard what the woman said, he tore his clothes. As he was passing by on the wall, the people could see he was wearing sackcloth under his clothes.
2KI 6:31 Then he said, “May God judge me severely if Elisha son of Shaphat still has his head by the end of the day!”
2KI 6:32 Now Elisha was sitting in his house with the community leaders. The king sent a messenger on ahead, but before he arrived, Elisha said to the leaders, “Do you realize this assassin intends to cut off my head?” Look, when the messenger arrives, shut the door and lean against it. His master will certainly be right behind him.”
2KI 6:33 He was still talking to them when the messenger approached and said, “Look, the Lord is responsible for this disaster! Why should I continue to wait for the Lord to help?”
2KI 7:1 Elisha replied, “Hear the word of the Lord! This is what the Lord says, ‘About this time tomorrow a seah of finely milled flour will sell for a shekel and two seahs of barley for a shekel at the gate of Samaria.’”
2KI 7:2 An officer who was the king’s right-hand man responded to the prophet, “Look, even if the Lord made it rain by opening holes in the sky, could this happen so soon?” Elisha said, “Look, you will see it happen with your own eyes, but you will not eat any of the food!”
2KI 7:3 Now four men with a skin disease were sitting at the entrance of the city gate. They said to one another, “Why are we just sitting here waiting to die?
2KI 7:4 If we go into the city, we’ll die of starvation, and if we stay here we’ll die! So come on, let’s defect to the Syrian camp! If they spare us, we’ll live; if they kill us – well, we were going to die anyway.”
2KI 7:5 So they started toward the Syrian camp at dusk. When they reached the edge of the Syrian camp, there was no one there.
2KI 7:6 The Lord had caused the Syrian camp to hear the sound of chariots and horses and a large army. Then they said to one another, “Look, the king of Israel has paid the kings of the Hittites and Egypt to attack us!”
2KI 7:7 So they got up and fled at dusk, leaving behind their tents, horses, and donkeys. They left the camp as it was and ran for their lives.
2KI 7:8 When the men with a skin disease reached the edge of the camp, they entered a tent and had a meal. They also took some silver, gold, and clothes and went and hid it all. Then they went back and entered another tent. They looted it and went and hid what they had taken.
2KI 7:9 Then they said to one another, “It’s not right what we’re doing! This is a day to celebrate, but we haven’t told anyone. If we wait until dawn, we’ll be punished. So come on, let’s go and inform the royal palace.”
2KI 7:10 So they went and called out to the gatekeepers of the city. They told them, “We entered the Syrian camp and there was no one there. We didn’t even hear a man’s voice. But the horses and donkeys are still tied up, and the tents remain up.”
2KI 7:11 The gatekeepers relayed the news to the royal palace.
2KI 7:12 The king got up in the night and said to his advisers, “I will tell you what the Syrians have done to us. They know we are starving, so they left the camp and hid in the field, thinking, ‘When they come out of the city, we will capture them alive and enter the city.’”
2KI 7:13 One of his advisers replied, “Pick some men and have them take five of the horses that are left in the city. (Even if they are killed, their fate will be no different than that of all the Israelite people – we’re all going to die!) Let’s send them out so we can know for sure what’s going on.”
2KI 7:14 So they picked two horsemen and the king sent them out to track the Syrian army. He ordered them, “Go and find out what’s going on.”
2KI 7:15 So they tracked them as far as the Jordan. The road was filled with clothes and equipment that the Syrians had discarded in their haste. The scouts went back and told the king.
2KI 7:16 Then the people went out and looted the Syrian camp. A seah of finely milled flour sold for a shekel, and two seahs of barley for a shekel, just as the Lord had said they would.
2KI 7:17 Now the king had placed the officer who was his right-hand man at the city gate. When the people rushed out, they trampled him to death in the gate. This fulfilled the prophet’s word which he had spoken when the king tried to arrest him.
2KI 7:18 The prophet told the king, “Two seahs of barley will sell for a shekel, and a seah of finely milled flour for a shekel; this will happen about this time tomorrow in the gate of Samaria.”
2KI 7:19 But the officer replied to the prophet, “Look, even if the Lord made it rain by opening holes in the sky, could this happen so soon?” Elisha said, “Look, you will see it happen with your own eyes, but you will not eat any of the food!”
2KI 7:20 This is exactly what happened to him. The people trampled him to death in the city gate.
2KI 8:1 Now Elisha advised the woman whose son he had brought back to life, “You and your family should go and live somewhere else for a while, for the Lord has decreed that a famine will overtake the land for seven years.”
2KI 8:2 So the woman did as the prophet said. She and her family went and lived in the land of the Philistines for seven years.
2KI 8:3 After seven years the woman returned from the land of the Philistines and went to ask the king to give her back her house and field.
2KI 8:4 Now the king was talking to Gehazi, the prophet’s servant, and said, “Tell me all the great things which Elisha has done.”
2KI 8:5 While Gehazi was telling the king how Elisha had brought the dead back to life, the woman whose son he had brought back to life came to ask the king for her house and field. Gehazi said, “My master, O king, this is the very woman and this is her son whom Elisha brought back to life!”
2KI 8:6 The king asked the woman about it, and she gave him the details. The king assigned a eunuch to take care of her request and ordered him, “Give her back everything she owns, as well as the amount of crops her field produced from the day she left the land until now.”
2KI 8:7 Elisha traveled to Damascus while King Ben Hadad of Syria was sick. The king was told, “The prophet has come here.”
2KI 8:8 So the king told Hazael, “Take a gift and go visit the prophet. Request from him an oracle from the Lord. Ask him, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’”
2KI 8:9 So Hazael went to visit Elisha. He took along a gift, as well as forty camel loads of all the fine things of Damascus. When he arrived, he stood before him and said, “Your son, King Ben Hadad of Syria, has sent me to you with this question, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’”
2KI 8:10 Elisha said to him, “Go and tell him, ‘You will surely recover,’ but the Lord has revealed to me that he will surely die.”
2KI 8:11 Elisha just stared at him until Hazael became uncomfortable. Then the prophet started crying.
2KI 8:12 Hazael asked, “Why are you crying, my master?” He replied, “Because I know the trouble you will cause the Israelites. You will set fire to their fortresses, kill their young men with the sword, smash their children to bits, and rip open their pregnant women.”
2KI 8:13 Hazael said, “How could your servant, who is as insignificant as a dog, accomplish this great military victory?” Elisha answered, “The Lord has revealed to me that you will be the king of Syria.”
2KI 8:14 He left Elisha and went to his master. Ben Hadad asked him, “What did Elisha tell you?” Hazael replied, “He told me you would surely recover.”
2KI 8:15 The next day Hazael took a piece of cloth, dipped it in water, and spread it over Ben Hadad’s face until he died. Then Hazael replaced him as king.
2KI 8:16 In the fifth year of the reign of Israel’s King Joram, son of Ahab, Jehoshaphat’s son Jehoram became king over Judah.
2KI 8:17 He was thirty-two years old when he became king and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem.
2KI 8:18 He followed in the footsteps of the kings of Israel, just as Ahab’s dynasty had done, for he married Ahab’s daughter. He did evil in the sight of the Lord.
2KI 8:19 But the Lord was unwilling to destroy Judah. He preserved Judah for the sake of his servant David to whom he had promised a perpetual dynasty.
2KI 8:20 During his reign Edom freed themselves from Judah’s control and set up their own king.
2KI 8:21 Joram crossed over to Zair with all his chariots. The Edomites, who had surrounded him, attacked at night and defeated him and his chariot officers. The Israelite army retreated to their homeland.
2KI 8:22 So Edom has remained free from Judah’s control to this very day. At that same time Libnah also rebelled.
2KI 8:23 The rest of the events of Joram’s reign, including a record of his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 8:24 Joram passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of David. His son Ahaziah replaced him as king.
2KI 8:25 In the twelfth year of the reign of Israel’s King Joram, son of Ahab, Jehoram’s son Ahaziah became king over Judah.
2KI 8:26 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king and he reigned for one year in Jerusalem. His mother was Athaliah, the granddaughter of King Omri of Israel.
2KI 8:27 He followed in the footsteps of Ahab’s dynasty and did evil in the sight of the Lord, like Ahab’s dynasty, for he was related to Ahab’s family.
2KI 8:28 He joined Ahab’s son Joram in a battle against King Hazael of Syria at Ramoth Gilead in which the Syrians defeated Joram.
2KI 8:29 King Joram returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds he received from the Syrians in Ramah when he fought against King Hazael of Syria. King Ahaziah son of Jehoram of Judah went down to visit Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, for he was ill.
2KI 9:1 Now Elisha the prophet summoned a member of the prophetic guild and told him, “Tuck your robes into your belt, take this container of olive oil in your hand, and go to Ramoth Gilead.
2KI 9:2 When you arrive there, look for Jehu son of Jehoshaphat son of Nimshi and take him aside into an inner room.
2KI 9:3 Take the container of olive oil, pour it over his head, and say, ‘This is what the Lord says, “I have designated you as king over Israel.”’ Then open the door and run away quickly!”
2KI 9:4 So the young prophet went to Ramoth Gilead.
2KI 9:5 When he arrived, the officers of the army were sitting there. So he said, “I have a message for you, O officer.” Jehu asked, “For which one of us?” He replied, “For you, O officer.”
2KI 9:6 So Jehu got up and went inside. Then the prophet poured the olive oil on his head and said to him, “This is what the Lord God of Israel says, ‘I have designated you as king over the Lord’s people Israel.
2KI 9:7 You will destroy the family of your master Ahab. I will get revenge against Jezebel for the shed blood of my servants the prophets and for the shed blood of all the Lord’s servants.
2KI 9:8 Ahab’s entire family will die. I will cut off every last male belonging to Ahab in Israel, including even the weak and incapacitated.
2KI 9:9 I will make Ahab’s dynasty like those of Jeroboam son of Nebat and Baasha son of Ahijah.
2KI 9:10 Dogs will devour Jezebel on the plot of ground in Jezreel; she will not be buried.’” Then he opened the door and ran away.
2KI 9:11 When Jehu rejoined his master’s servants, they asked him, “Is everything all right? Why did this madman visit you?” He replied, “Ah, it’s not important. You know what kind of man he is and the kinds of things he says.”
2KI 9:12 But they said, “You’re lying! Tell us what he said.” So he told them what he had said. He also related how he had said, “This is what the Lord says, ‘I have designated you as king over Israel.’”
2KI 9:13 Each of them quickly took off his cloak and they spread them out at Jehu’s feet on the steps. The trumpet was blown and they shouted, “Jehu is king!”
2KI 9:14 Then Jehu son of Jehoshaphat son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. Now Joram had been in Ramoth Gilead with the whole Israelite army, guarding against an invasion by King Hazael of Syria.
2KI 9:15 But King Joram had returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds he received from the Syrians when he fought against King Hazael of Syria. Jehu told his supporters, “If you really want me to be king, then don’t let anyone escape from the city to go and warn Jezreel.”
2KI 9:16 Jehu drove his chariot to Jezreel, for Joram was recuperating there. (Now King Ahaziah of Judah had come down to visit Joram.)
2KI 9:17 Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel and saw Jehu’s troops approaching. He said, “I see troops!” Jehoram ordered, “Send a rider out to meet them and have him ask, ‘Is everything all right?’”
2KI 9:18 So the horseman went to meet him and said, “This is what the king says, ‘Is everything all right?’” Jehu replied, “None of your business! Follow me.” The watchman reported, “The messenger reached them, but hasn’t started back.”
2KI 9:19 So he sent a second horseman out to them and he said, “This is what the king says, ‘Is everything all right?’” Jehu replied, “None of your business! Follow me.”
2KI 9:20 The watchman reported, “He reached them, but hasn’t started back. The one who drives the lead chariot drives like Jehu son of Nimshi; he drives recklessly.”
2KI 9:21 Jehoram ordered, “Hitch up my chariot.” When his chariot had been hitched up, King Jehoram of Israel and King Ahaziah of Judah went out in their respective chariots to meet Jehu. They met up with him in the plot of land that had once belonged to Naboth of Jezreel.
2KI 9:22 When Jehoram saw Jehu, he asked, “Is everything all right, Jehu?” He replied, “How can everything be all right as long as your mother Jezebel promotes idolatry and pagan practices?”
2KI 9:23 Jehoram turned his chariot around and took off. He said to Ahaziah, “It’s a trap, Ahaziah!”
2KI 9:24 Jehu aimed his bow and shot an arrow right between Jehoram’s shoulders. The arrow went through his heart and he fell to his knees in his chariot.
2KI 9:25 Jehu ordered his officer Bidkar, “Pick him up and throw him into the part of the field that once belonged to Naboth of Jezreel. Remember, you and I were riding together behind his father Ahab, when the Lord pronounced this judgment on him,
2KI 9:26 ‘“Know for sure that I saw the shed blood of Naboth and his sons yesterday,” says the Lord, “and that I will give you what you deserve right here in this plot of land,” says the Lord.’ So now pick him up and throw him into this plot of land, just as the Lord said.”
2KI 9:27 When King Ahaziah of Judah saw what happened, he took off up the road to Beth Haggan. Jehu chased him and ordered, “Shoot him too.” They shot him while he was driving his chariot up the ascent of Gur near Ibleam. He fled to Megiddo and died there.
2KI 9:28 His servants took his body back to Jerusalem and buried him in his tomb with his ancestors in the city of David.
2KI 9:29 Ahaziah had become king over Judah in the eleventh year of Joram son of Ahab.
2KI 9:30 Jehu approached Jezreel. When Jezebel heard the news, she put on some eye liner, fixed up her hair, and leaned out the window.
2KI 9:31 When Jehu came through the gate, she said, “Is everything all right, Zimri, murderer of his master?”
2KI 9:32 He looked up at the window and said, “Who is on my side? Who?” Two or three eunuchs looked down at him.
2KI 9:33 He said, “Throw her down!” So they threw her down, and when she hit the ground, her blood splattered against the wall and the horses, and Jehu drove his chariot over her.
2KI 9:34 He went inside and had a meal. Then he said, “Dispose of this accursed woman’s corpse. Bury her, for after all, she was a king’s daughter.”
2KI 9:35 But when they went to bury her, they found nothing left but the skull, feet, and palms of the hands.
2KI 9:36 When they went back and told him, he said, “The Lord’s word through his servant, Elijah the Tishbite, has come to pass. He warned, ‘In the plot of land at Jezreel, dogs will devour Jezebel’s flesh.
2KI 9:37 Jezebel’s corpse will be like manure on the surface of the ground in the plot of land at Jezreel. People will not be able to even recognize her.’”
2KI 10:1 Ahab had seventy sons living in Samaria. So Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria to the leading officials of Jezreel and to the guardians of Ahab’s dynasty. This is what the letters said,
2KI 10:2 “You have with you the sons of your master, chariots and horses, a fortified city, and weapons. So when this letter arrives,
2KI 10:3 pick the best and most capable of your master’s sons, place him on his father’s throne, and defend your master’s dynasty.”
2KI 10:4 They were absolutely terrified and said, “Look, two kings could not stop him! How can we?”
2KI 10:5 So the palace supervisor, the city commissioner, the leaders, and the guardians sent this message to Jehu, “We are your subjects! Whatever you say, we will do. We will not make anyone king. Do what you consider proper.”
2KI 10:6 He wrote them a second letter, saying, “If you are really on my side and are willing to obey me, then take the heads of your master’s sons and come to me in Jezreel at this time tomorrow.” Now the king had seventy sons, and the prominent men of the city were raising them.
2KI 10:7 When they received the letter, they seized the king’s sons and executed all seventy of them. They put their heads in baskets and sent them to him in Jezreel.
2KI 10:8 The messenger came and told Jehu, “They have brought the heads of the king’s sons.” Jehu said, “Stack them in two piles at the entrance of the city gate until morning.”
2KI 10:9 In the morning he went out and stood there. Then he said to all the people, “You are innocent. I conspired against my master and killed him. But who struck down all of these men?
2KI 10:10 Therefore take note that not one of the judgments the Lord announced against Ahab’s dynasty has failed to materialize. The Lord had done what he announced through his servant Elijah.”
2KI 10:11 Then Jehu killed all who were left of Ahab’s family in Jezreel, and all his nobles, close friends, and priests. He left no survivors.
2KI 10:12 Jehu then left there and set out for Samaria. While he was traveling through Beth Eked of the Shepherds,
2KI 10:13 Jehu encountered the relatives of King Ahaziah of Judah. He asked, “Who are you?” They replied, “We are Ahaziah’s relatives. We have come down to see how the king’s sons and the queen mother’s sons are doing.”
2KI 10:14 He said, “Capture them alive!” So they captured them alive and then executed all forty-two of them in the cistern at Beth Eked. He left no survivors.
2KI 10:15 When he left there, he met Jehonadab, son of Rekab, who had been looking for him. Jehu greeted him and asked, “Are you as committed to me as I am to you?” Jehonadab answered, “I am!” Jehu replied, “If so, give me your hand.” So he offered his hand and Jehu pulled him up into the chariot.
2KI 10:16 Jehu said, “Come with me and see how zealous I am for the Lord’s cause.” So he took him along in his chariot.
2KI 10:17 He went to Samaria and exterminated all the members of Ahab’s family who were still alive in Samaria, just as the Lord had announced to Elijah.
2KI 10:18 Jehu assembled all the people and said to them, “Ahab worshiped Baal a little; Jehu will worship him with great devotion.
2KI 10:19 So now, bring to me all the prophets of Baal, as well as all his servants and priests. None of them must be absent, for I am offering a great sacrifice to Baal. Any of them who fail to appear will lose their lives.” But Jehu was tricking them so he could destroy the servants of Baal.
2KI 10:20 Then Jehu ordered, “Make arrangements for a celebration for Baal.” So they announced it.
2KI 10:21 Jehu sent invitations throughout Israel, and all the servants of Baal came; not one was absent. They arrived at the temple of Baal and filled it up from end to end.
2KI 10:22 Jehu ordered the one who was in charge of the wardrobe, “Bring out robes for all the servants of Baal.” So he brought out robes for them.
2KI 10:23 Then Jehu and Jehonadab son of Rekab went to the temple of Baal. Jehu said to the servants of Baal, “Make sure there are no servants of the Lord here with you; there must be only servants of Baal.”
2KI 10:24 They went inside to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had stationed eighty men outside. He had told them, “If any of the men inside get away, you will pay with your lives!”
2KI 10:25 When he finished offering the burnt sacrifice, Jehu ordered the royal guard and officers, “Come in and strike them down! Don’t let any escape!” So the royal guard and officers struck them down with the sword and left their bodies lying there. Then they entered the inner sanctuary of the temple of Baal.
2KI 10:26 They hauled out the sacred pillar of the temple of Baal and burned it.
2KI 10:27 They demolished the sacred pillar of Baal and the temple of Baal; it is used as a latrine to this very day.
2KI 10:28 So Jehu eradicated Baal worship from Israel.
2KI 10:29 However, Jehu did not repudiate the sins which Jeroboam son of Nebat had encouraged Israel to commit; the golden calves remained in Bethel and Dan.
2KI 10:30 The Lord said to Jehu, “You have done well. You have accomplished my will and carried out my wishes with regard to Ahab’s dynasty. Therefore four generations of your descendants will rule over Israel.”
2KI 10:31 But Jehu did not carefully and wholeheartedly obey the law of the Lord God of Israel. He did not repudiate the sins which Jeroboam had encouraged Israel to commit.
2KI 10:32 In those days the Lord began to reduce the size of Israel’s territory. Hazael attacked their eastern border.
2KI 10:33 He conquered all the land of Gilead, including the territory of Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh, extending all the way from the Aroer in the Arnon Valley through Gilead to Bashan.
2KI 10:34 The rest of the events of Jehu’s reign, including all his accomplishments and successes, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 10:35 Jehu passed away and was buried in Samaria. His son Jehoahaz replaced him as king.
2KI 10:36 Jehu reigned over Israel for twenty-eight years in Samaria.
2KI 11:1 When Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she was determined to destroy the entire royal line.
2KI 11:2 So Jehosheba, the daughter of King Joram and sister of Ahaziah, took Ahaziah’s son Joash and sneaked him away from the rest of the royal descendants who were to be executed. She hid him and his nurse in the room where the bed covers were stored. So he was hidden from Athaliah and escaped execution.
2KI 11:3 He hid out with his nurse in the Lord’s temple for six years, while Athaliah was ruling over the land.
2KI 11:4 In the seventh year Jehoiada summoned the officers of the units of hundreds of the Carians and the royal bodyguard. He met with them in the Lord’s temple. He made an agreement with them and made them swear an oath of allegiance in the Lord’s temple. Then he showed them the king’s son.
2KI 11:5 He ordered them, “This is what you must do. One third of the unit that is on duty during the Sabbath will guard the royal palace.
2KI 11:6 Another third of you will be stationed at the Foundation Gate. Still another third of you will be stationed at the gate behind the royal guard. You will take turns guarding the palace.
2KI 11:7 The two units who are off duty on the Sabbath will guard the Lord’s temple and protect the king.
2KI 11:8 You must surround the king. Each of you must hold his weapon in his hand. Whoever approaches your ranks must be killed. You must accompany the king wherever he goes.”
2KI 11:9 The officers of the units of hundreds did just as Jehoiada the priest ordered. Each of them took his men, those who were on duty during the Sabbath as well as those who were off duty on the Sabbath, and reported to Jehoiada the priest.
2KI 11:10 The priest gave to the officers of the units of hundreds King David’s spears and the shields that were kept in the Lord’s temple.
2KI 11:11 The royal bodyguard took their stations, each holding his weapon in his hand. They lined up from the south side of the temple to the north side and stood near the altar and the temple, surrounding the king.
2KI 11:12 Jehoiada led out the king’s son and placed on him the crown and the royal insignia. They proclaimed him king and poured olive oil on his head. They clapped their hands and cried out, “Long live the king!”
2KI 11:13 When Athaliah heard the royal guard shout, she joined the crowd at the Lord’s temple.
2KI 11:14 Then she saw the king standing by the pillar, according to custom. The officers stood beside the king with their trumpets and all the people of the land were celebrating and blowing trumpets. Athaliah tore her clothes and screamed, “Treason, treason!”
2KI 11:15 Jehoiada the priest ordered the officers of the units of hundreds, who were in charge of the army, “Bring her outside the temple to the guards. Put the sword to anyone who follows her.” The priest gave this order because he had decided she should not be executed in the Lord’s temple.
2KI 11:16 They seized her and took her into the precincts of the royal palace through the horses’ entrance. There she was executed.
2KI 11:17 Jehoiada then drew up a covenant between the Lord and the king and people, stipulating that they should be loyal to the Lord.
2KI 11:18 All the people of the land went and demolished the temple of Baal. They smashed its altars and idols to bits. They killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altar. Jehoiada the priest then placed guards at the Lord’s temple.
2KI 11:19 He took the officers of the units of hundreds, the Carians, the royal bodyguard, and all the people of land, and together they led the king down from the Lord’s temple. They entered the royal palace through the Gate of the Royal Bodyguard, and the king sat down on the royal throne.
2KI 11:20 All the people of the land celebrated, for the city had rest now that they had killed Athaliah with the sword in the royal palace.
2KI 11:21 Jehoash was seven years old when he began to reign.
2KI 12:1 In Jehu’s seventh year Jehoash became king; he reigned for forty years in Jerusalem. His mother was Zibiah, who was from Beer Sheba.
2KI 12:2 Throughout his lifetime Jehoash did what the Lord approved, just as Jehoiada the priest taught him.
2KI 12:3 But the high places were not eliminated; the people continued to offer sacrifices and burn incense on the high places.
2KI 12:4 Jehoash said to the priests, “I place at your disposal all the consecrated silver that has been brought to the Lord’s temple, including the silver collected from the census tax, the silver received from those who have made vows, and all the silver that people have voluntarily contributed to the Lord’s temple.
2KI 12:5 The priests should receive the silver they need from the treasurers and repair any damage to the temple they discover.”
2KI 12:6 By the twenty-third year of King Jehoash’s reign the priests had still not repaired the damage to the temple.
2KI 12:7 So King Jehoash summoned Jehoiada the priest along with the other priests, and said to them, “Why have you not repaired the damage to the temple? Now, take no more silver from your treasurers unless you intend to use it to repair the damage.”
2KI 12:8 The priests agreed not to collect silver from the people and relieved themselves of personal responsibility for the temple repairs.
2KI 12:9 Jehoiada the priest took a chest and drilled a hole in its lid. He placed it on the right side of the altar near the entrance of the Lord’s temple. The priests who guarded the entrance would put into it all the silver brought to the Lord’s temple.
2KI 12:10 When they saw the chest was full of silver, the royal secretary and the high priest counted the silver that had been brought to the Lord’s temple and bagged it up.
2KI 12:11 They would then hand over the silver that had been weighed to the construction foremen assigned to the Lord’s temple. They hired carpenters and builders to work on the Lord’s temple,
2KI 12:12 as well as masons and stonecutters. They bought wood and chiseled stone to repair the damage to the Lord’s temple and also paid for all the other expenses.
2KI 12:13 The silver brought to the Lord’s temple was not used for silver bowls, trimming shears, basins, trumpets, or any kind of gold or silver implements.
2KI 12:14 It was handed over to the foremen who used it to repair the Lord’s temple.
2KI 12:15 They did not audit the treasurers who disbursed the funds to the foremen, for they were honest.
2KI 12:16 (The silver collected in conjunction with reparation offerings and sin offerings was not brought to the Lord’s temple; it belonged to the priests.)
2KI 12:17 At that time King Hazael of Syria attacked Gath and captured it. Hazael then decided to attack Jerusalem.
2KI 12:18 King Jehoash of Judah collected all the sacred items that his ancestors Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, and Ahaziah, kings of Judah, had consecrated, as well as his own sacred items and all the gold that could be found in the treasuries of the Lord’s temple and the royal palace. He sent it all to King Hazael of Syria, who then withdrew from Jerusalem.
2KI 12:19 The rest of the events of Joash’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 12:20 His servants conspired against him and murdered Joash at Beth-Millo, on the road that goes down to Silla.
2KI 12:21 His servants Jozabad son of Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer murdered him. He was buried with his ancestors in the city of David. His son Amaziah replaced him as king.
2KI 13:1 In the twenty-third year of the reign of Judah’s King Joash son of Ahaziah, Jehu’s son Jehoahaz became king over Israel. He reigned in Samaria for seventeen years.
2KI 13:2 He did evil in the sight of the Lord. He continued in the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who had encouraged Israel to sin; he did not repudiate those sins.
2KI 13:3 The Lord was furious with Israel and handed them over to King Hazael of Syria and to Hazael’s son Ben Hadad for many years.
2KI 13:4 Jehoahaz asked for the Lord’s mercy and the Lord responded favorably, for he saw that Israel was oppressed by the king of Syria.
2KI 13:5 The Lord provided a deliverer for Israel and they were freed from Syria’s power. The Israelites once more lived in security.
2KI 13:6 But they did not repudiate the sinful ways of the family of Jeroboam, who encouraged Israel to sin; they continued in those sins. There was even an Asherah pole standing in Samaria.
2KI 13:7 Jehoahaz had no army left except for fifty horsemen, ten chariots, and 10,000 foot soldiers. The king of Syria had destroyed his troops and trampled on them like dust.
2KI 13:8 The rest of the events of Jehoahaz’s reign, including all his accomplishments and successes, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 13:9 Jehoahaz passed away and was buried in Samaria. His son Joash replaced him as king.
2KI 13:10 In the thirty-seventh year of King Joash’s reign over Judah, Jehoahaz’s son Jehoash became king over Israel. He reigned in Samaria for sixteen years.
2KI 13:11 He did evil in the sight of the Lord. He did not repudiate the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who encouraged Israel to sin; he continued in those sins.
2KI 13:12 The rest of the events of Joash’s reign, including all his accomplishments and his successful war with King Amaziah of Judah, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 13:13 Joash passed away and Jeroboam succeeded him on the throne. Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.
2KI 13:14 Now Elisha had a terminal illness. King Joash of Israel went down to visit him. He wept before him and said, “My father, my father! The chariot and horsemen of Israel!”
2KI 13:15 Elisha told him, “Take a bow and some arrows,” and he did so.
2KI 13:16 Then Elisha told the king of Israel, “Aim the bow.” He did so, and Elisha placed his hands on the king’s hands.
2KI 13:17 Elisha said, “Open the east window,” and he did so. Elisha said, “Shoot!” and he did so. Elisha said, “This arrow symbolizes the victory the Lord will give you over Syria. You will annihilate Syria in Aphek!”
2KI 13:18 Then Elisha said, “Take the arrows,” and he did so. He told the king of Israel, “Strike the ground!” He struck the ground three times and stopped.
2KI 13:19 The prophet got angry at him and said, “If you had struck the ground five or six times, you would have annihilated Syria! But now, you will defeat Syria only three times.”
2KI 13:20 Elisha died and was buried. Moabite raiding parties invaded the land at the beginning of the year.
2KI 13:21 One day some men were burying a man when they spotted a raiding party. So they threw the dead man into Elisha’s tomb. When the body touched Elisha’s bones, the dead man came to life and stood on his feet.
2KI 13:22 Now King Hazael of Syria oppressed Israel throughout Jehoahaz’s reign.
2KI 13:23 But the Lord had mercy on them and felt pity for them. He extended his favor to them because of the promise he had made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He has been unwilling to destroy them or remove them from his presence to this very day.
2KI 13:24 When King Hazael of Syria died, his son Ben Hadad replaced him as king.
2KI 13:25 Jehoahaz’s son Jehoash took back from Ben Hadad son of Hazael the cities that he had taken from his father Jehoahaz in war. Joash defeated him three times and recovered the Israelite cities.
2KI 14:1 In the second year of the reign of Israel’s King Joash son of Joahaz, Joash’s son Amaziah became king over Judah.
2KI 14:2 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother was Jehoaddan, who was from Jerusalem.
2KI 14:3 He did what the Lord approved, but not like David his father. He followed the example of his father Joash.
2KI 14:4 But the high places were not eliminated; the people continued to offer sacrifices and burn incense on the high places.
2KI 14:5 When he had secured control of the kingdom, he executed the servants who had assassinated his father.
2KI 14:6 But he did not execute the sons of the assassins. He obeyed the Lord’s commandment as recorded in the law scroll of Moses, “Fathers must not be put to death for what their sons do, and sons must not be put to death for what their fathers do. A man must be put to death only for his own sin.”
2KI 14:7 He defeated 10,000 Edomites in the Salt Valley; he captured Sela in battle and renamed it Joktheel, a name it has retained to this very day.
2KI 14:8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel. He said, “Come, let’s meet face to face.”
2KI 14:9 King Jehoash of Israel sent this message back to King Amaziah of Judah, “A thornbush in Lebanon sent this message to a cedar in Lebanon, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ Then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and trampled down the thorn.
2KI 14:10 You thoroughly defeated Edom and it has gone to your head! Gloat over your success, but stay in your palace. Why bring calamity on yourself? Why bring down yourself and Judah along with you?”
2KI 14:11 But Amaziah would not heed the warning, so King Jehoash of Israel attacked. He and King Amaziah of Judah met face to face in Beth Shemesh of Judah.
2KI 14:12 Judah was defeated by Israel, and each man ran back home.
2KI 14:13 King Jehoash of Israel captured King Amaziah of Judah, son of Jehoash son of Ahaziah, in Beth Shemesh. He attacked Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Ephraim to the Corner Gate – a distance of about six hundred feet.
2KI 14:14 He took away all the gold and silver, all the items found in the Lord’s temple and in the treasuries of the royal palace, and some hostages. Then he went back to Samaria. (
2KI 14:15 The rest of the events of Jehoash’s reign, including all his accomplishments and his successful war with King Amaziah of Judah, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 14:16 Jehoash passed away and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. His son Jeroboam replaced him as king.)
2KI 14:17 King Amaziah son of Joash of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Jehoash son of Jehoahaz of Israel.
2KI 14:18 The rest of the events of Amaziah’s reign are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 14:19 Conspirators plotted against him in Jerusalem, so he fled to Lachish. But they sent assassins after him and they killed him there.
2KI 14:20 His body was carried back by horses and he was buried in Jerusalem with his ancestors in the city of David.
2KI 14:21 All the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in his father Amaziah’s place.
2KI 14:22 Azariah built up Elat and restored it to Judah after the king had passed away.
2KI 14:23 In the fifteenth year of the reign of Judah’s King Amaziah, son of Joash, Jeroboam son of Joash became king over Israel. He reigned for forty-one years in Samaria.
2KI 14:24 He did evil in the sight of the Lord; he did not repudiate the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who encouraged Israel to sin.
2KI 14:25 He restored the border of Israel from Lebo Hamath in the north to the sea of the Arabah in the south, in accordance with the word of the Lord God of Israel announced through his servant Jonah son of Amittai, the prophet from Gath Hepher.
2KI 14:26 The Lord saw Israel’s intense suffering; everyone was weak and incapacitated and Israel had no deliverer.
2KI 14:27 The Lord had not decreed that he would blot out Israel’s memory from under heaven, so he delivered them through Jeroboam son of Joash.
2KI 14:28 The rest of the events of Jeroboam’s reign, including all his accomplishments, his military success in restoring Israelite control over Damascus and Hamath, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 14:29 Jeroboam passed away and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. His son Zechariah replaced him as king.
2KI 15:1 In the twenty-seventh year of King Jeroboam’s reign over Israel, Amaziah’s son Azariah became king over Judah.
2KI 15:2 He was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecholiah, who was from Jerusalem.
2KI 15:3 He did what the Lord approved, just as his father Amaziah had done.
2KI 15:4 But the high places were not eliminated; the people continued to offer sacrifices and burn incense on the high places.
2KI 15:5 The Lord afflicted the king with an illness; he suffered from a skin disease until the day he died. He lived in separate quarters, while his son Jotham was in charge of the palace and ruled over the people of the land.
2KI 15:6 The rest of the events of Azariah’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 15:7 Azariah passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of David. His son Jotham replaced him as king.
2KI 15:8 In the thirty-eighth year of King Azariah’s reign over Judah, Jeroboam’s son Zechariah became king over Israel. He reigned in Samaria for six months.
2KI 15:9 He did evil in the sight of the Lord, as his ancestors had done. He did not repudiate the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who encouraged Israel to sin.
2KI 15:10 Shallum son of Jabesh conspired against him; he assassinated him in Ibleam and took his place as king.
2KI 15:11 The rest of the events of Zechariah’s reign are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 15:12 His assassination brought to fulfillment the Lord’s word to Jehu, “Four generations of your descendants will rule over Israel.” That is exactly what happened.
2KI 15:13 Shallum son of Jabesh became king in the thirty-ninth year of King Uzziah’s reign over Judah. He reigned for one month in Samaria.
2KI 15:14 Menahem son of Gadi went up from Tirzah to Samaria and attacked Shallum son of Jabesh. He killed him and took his place as king.
2KI 15:15 The rest of the events of Shallum’s reign, including the conspiracy he organized, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 15:16 At that time Menahem came from Tirzah and attacked Tiphsah. He struck down all who lived in the city and the surrounding territory, because they would not surrender. He even ripped open the pregnant women.
2KI 15:17 In the thirty-ninth year of King Azariah’s reign over Judah, Menahem son of Gadi became king over Israel. He reigned for twelve years in Samaria.
2KI 15:18 He did evil in the sight of the Lord; he did not repudiate the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who encouraged Israel to sin. During his reign,
2KI 15:19 Pul king of Assyria invaded the land, and Menahem paid him a thousand talents of silver to gain his support and to solidify his control of the kingdom.
2KI 15:20 Menahem got this silver by taxing all the wealthy men in Israel; he took fifty shekels of silver from each one of them and paid it to the king of Assyria. Then the king of Assyria left; he did not stay there in the land.
2KI 15:21 The rest of the events of Menahem’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 15:22 Menahem passed away and his son Pekahiah replaced him as king.
2KI 15:23 In the fiftieth year of King Azariah’s reign over Judah, Menahem’s son Pekahiah became king over Israel. He reigned in Samaria for two years.
2KI 15:24 He did evil in the sight of the Lord; he did not repudiate the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who encouraged Israel to sin.
2KI 15:25 His officer Pekah son of Remaliah conspired against him. He and fifty Gileadites assassinated Pekahiah, as well as Argob and Arieh, in Samaria in the fortress of the royal palace. Pekah then took his place as king.
2KI 15:26 The rest of the events of Pekahiah’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 15:27 In the fifty-second year of King Azariah’s reign over Judah, Pekah son of Remaliah became king over Israel. He reigned in Samaria for twenty years.
2KI 15:28 He did evil in the sight of the Lord; he did not repudiate the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat who encouraged Israel to sin.
2KI 15:29 During Pekah’s reign over Israel, King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria came and captured Ijon, Abel Beth Maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead, and Galilee, including all the territory of Naphtali. He deported the people to Assyria.
2KI 15:30 Hoshea son of Elah conspired against Pekah son of Remaliah. He assassinated him and took his place as king, in the twentieth year of the reign of Jotham son of Uzziah.
2KI 15:31 The rest of the events of Pekah’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2KI 15:32 In the second year of the reign of Israel’s King Pekah son of Remaliah, Uzziah’s son Jotham became king over Judah.
2KI 15:33 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
2KI 15:34 He did what the Lord approved, just as his father Uzziah had done.
2KI 15:35 But the high places were not eliminated; the people continued to offer sacrifices and burn incense on the high places. He built the Upper Gate to the Lord’s temple.
2KI 15:36 The rest of the events of Jotham’s reign, including his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 15:37 In those days the Lord prompted King Rezin of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah to attack Judah.
2KI 15:38 Jotham passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of his ancestor David. His son Ahaz replaced him as king.
2KI 16:1 In the seventeenth year of the reign of Pekah son of Remaliah, Jotham’s son Ahaz became king over Judah.
2KI 16:2 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what pleased the Lord his God, in contrast to his ancestor David.
2KI 16:3 He followed in the footsteps of the kings of Israel. He passed his son through the fire, a horrible sin practiced by the nations whom the Lord drove out from before the Israelites.
2KI 16:4 He offered sacrifices and burned incense on the high places, on the hills, and under every green tree.
2KI 16:5 At that time King Rezin of Syria and King Pekah son of Remaliah of Israel attacked Jerusalem. They besieged Ahaz, but were unable to conquer him.
2KI 16:6 (At that time King Rezin of Syria recovered Elat for Syria; he drove the Judahites from there. Syrians arrived in Elat and live there to this very day.)
2KI 16:7 Ahaz sent messengers to King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria, saying, “I am your servant and your dependent. March up and rescue me from the power of the king of Syria and the king of Israel, who have attacked me.”
2KI 16:8 Then Ahaz took the silver and gold that were in the Lord’s temple and in the treasuries of the royal palace and sent it as tribute to the king of Assyria.
2KI 16:9 The king of Assyria responded favorably to his request; he attacked Damascus and captured it. He deported the people to Kir and executed Rezin.
2KI 16:10 When King Ahaz went to meet with King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria in Damascus, he saw the altar there. King Ahaz sent to Uriah the priest a drawing of the altar and a blueprint for its design.
2KI 16:11 Uriah the priest built an altar in conformity to the plans King Ahaz had sent from Damascus. Uriah the priest finished it before King Ahaz arrived back from Damascus.
2KI 16:12 When the king arrived back from Damascus and saw the altar, he approached it and offered a sacrifice on it.
2KI 16:13 He offered his burnt sacrifice and his grain offering. He poured out his libation and sprinkled the blood from his peace offerings on the altar.
2KI 16:14 He moved the bronze altar that stood in the Lord’s presence from the front of the temple (between the altar and the Lord’s temple) and put it on the north side of the new altar.
2KI 16:15 King Ahaz ordered Uriah the priest, “On the large altar offer the morning burnt sacrifice, the evening grain offering, the royal burnt sacrifices and grain offering, the burnt sacrifice for all the people of Israel, their grain offering, and their libations. Sprinkle all the blood of the burnt sacrifice and other sacrifices on it. The bronze altar will be for my personal use.”
2KI 16:16 So Uriah the priest did exactly as King Ahaz ordered.
2KI 16:17 King Ahaz took off the frames of the movable stands, and removed the basins from them. He took “The Sea” down from the bronze bulls that supported it and put it on the pavement.
2KI 16:18 He also removed the Sabbath awning that had been built in the temple and the king’s outer entranceway, on account of the king of Assyria.
2KI 16:19 The rest of the events of Ahaz’s reign, including his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 16:20 Ahaz passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of David. His son Hezekiah replaced him as king.
2KI 17:1 In the twelfth year of King Ahaz’s reign over Judah, Hoshea son of Elah became king over Israel. He reigned in Samaria for nine years.
2KI 17:2 He did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not to the same degree as the Israelite kings who preceded him.
2KI 17:3 King Shalmaneser of Assyria threatened him; Hoshea became his subject and paid him tribute.
2KI 17:4 The king of Assyria discovered that Hoshea was planning a revolt. Hoshea had sent messengers to King So of Egypt and had not sent his annual tribute to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria arrested him and imprisoned him.
2KI 17:5 The king of Assyria marched through the whole land. He attacked Samaria and besieged it for three years.
2KI 17:6 In the ninth year of Hoshea’s reign, the king of Assyria captured Samaria and deported the people of Israel to Assyria. He settled them in Halah, along the Habor (the river of Gozan), and in the cities of the Medes.
2KI 17:7 This happened because the Israelites sinned against the Lord their God, who brought them up from the land of Egypt and freed them from the power of Pharaoh king of Egypt. They worshiped other gods;
2KI 17:8 they observed the practices of the nations whom the Lord had driven out from before Israel, and followed the example of the kings of Israel.
2KI 17:9 The Israelites said things about the Lord their God that were not right. They built high places in all their cities, from the watchtower to the fortress.
2KI 17:10 They set up sacred pillars and Asherah poles on every high hill and under every green tree.
2KI 17:11 They burned incense on all the high places just like the nations whom the Lord had driven away from before them. Their evil practices made the Lord angry.
2KI 17:12 They worshiped the disgusting idols in blatant disregard of the Lord’s command.
2KI 17:13 The Lord solemnly warned Israel and Judah through all his prophets and all the seers, “Turn back from your evil ways; obey my commandments and rules that are recorded in the law. I ordered your ancestors to keep this law and sent my servants the prophets to remind you of its demands.”
2KI 17:14 But they did not pay attention and were as stubborn as their ancestors, who had not trusted the Lord their God.
2KI 17:15 They rejected his rules, the covenant he had made with their ancestors, and the laws he had commanded them to obey. They paid allegiance to worthless idols, and so became worthless to the Lord. They copied the practices of the surrounding nations in blatant disregard of the Lord’s command.
2KI 17:16 They abandoned all the commandments of the Lord their God; they made two metal calves and an Asherah pole, bowed down to all the stars in the sky, and worshiped Baal.
2KI 17:17 They passed their sons and daughters through the fire, and practiced divination and omen reading. They committed themselves to doing evil in the sight of the Lord and made him angry.
2KI 17:18 So the Lord was furious with Israel and rejected them; only the tribe of Judah was left.
2KI 17:19 Judah also failed to keep the commandments of the Lord their God; they followed Israel’s example.
2KI 17:20 So the Lord rejected all of Israel’s descendants; he humiliated them and handed them over to robbers, until he had thrown them from his presence.
2KI 17:21 He tore Israel away from David’s dynasty, and Jeroboam son of Nebat became their king. Jeroboam drove Israel away from the Lord and encouraged them to commit a serious sin.
2KI 17:22 The Israelites followed in the sinful ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat and did not repudiate them.
2KI 17:23 Finally the Lord rejected Israel just as he had warned he would do through all his servants the prophets. Israel was deported from its land to Assyria and remains there to this very day.
2KI 17:24 The king of Assyria brought foreigners from Babylon, Cuthah, Avva, Hamath, and Sepharvaim and settled them in the cities of Samaria in place of the Israelites. They took possession of Samaria and lived in its cities.
2KI 17:25 When they first moved in, they did not worship the Lord. So the Lord sent lions among them and the lions were killing them.
2KI 17:26 The king of Assyria was told, “The nations whom you deported and settled in the cities of Samaria do not know the requirements of the God of the land, so he has sent lions among them. They are killing the people because they do not know the requirements of the God of the land.”
2KI 17:27 So the king of Assyria ordered, “Take back one of the priests whom you deported from there. He must settle there and teach them the requirements of the God of the land.”
2KI 17:28 So one of the priests whom they had deported from Samaria went back and settled in Bethel. He taught them how to worship the Lord.
2KI 17:29 But each of these nations made its own gods and put them in the shrines on the high places that the people of Samaria had made. Each nation did this in the cities where they lived.
2KI 17:30 The people from Babylon made Succoth Benoth, the people from Cuth made Nergal, the people from Hamath made Ashima,
2KI 17:31 the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burned their sons in the fire as an offering to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
2KI 17:32 At the same time they worshiped the Lord. They appointed some of their own people to serve as priests in the shrines on the high places.
2KI 17:33 They were worshiping the Lord and at the same time serving their own gods in accordance with the practices of the nations from which they had been deported.
2KI 17:34 To this very day they observe their earlier practices. They do not worship the Lord; they do not obey the rules, regulations, law, and commandments that the Lord gave the descendants of Jacob, whom he renamed Israel.
2KI 17:35 The Lord made an agreement with them and instructed them, “You must not worship other gods. Do not bow down to them, serve them, or offer sacrifices to them.
2KI 17:36 Instead you must worship the Lord, who brought you up from the land of Egypt by his great power and military ability; bow down to him and offer sacrifices to him.
2KI 17:37 You must carefully obey at all times the rules, regulations, law, and commandments he wrote down for you. You must not worship other gods.
2KI 17:38 You must never forget the agreement I made with you, and you must not worship other gods.
2KI 17:39 Instead you must worship the Lord your God; then he will rescue you from the power of all your enemies.”
2KI 17:40 But they pay no attention; instead they observe their earlier practices.
2KI 17:41 These nations are worshiping the Lord and at the same time serving their idols; their sons and grandsons do just as their fathers have done, to this very day.
2KI 18:1 In the third year of the reign of Israel’s King Hoshea son of Elah, Ahaz’s son Hezekiah became king over Judah.
2KI 18:2 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother was Abi, the daughter of Zechariah.
2KI 18:3 He did what the Lord approved, just as his ancestor David had done.
2KI 18:4 He eliminated the high places, smashed the sacred pillars to bits, and cut down the Asherah pole. He also demolished the bronze serpent that Moses had made, for up to that time the Israelites had been offering incense to it; it was called Nehushtan.
2KI 18:5 He trusted in the Lord God of Israel; in this regard there was none like him among the kings of Judah either before or after.
2KI 18:6 He was loyal to the Lord and did not abandon him. He obeyed the commandments which the Lord had given to Moses.
2KI 18:7 The Lord was with him; he succeeded in all his endeavors. He rebelled against the king of Assyria and refused to submit to him.
2KI 18:8 He defeated the Philistines as far as Gaza and its territory, from the watchtower to the city fortress.
2KI 18:9 In the fourth year of King Hezekiah’s reign (it was the seventh year of the reign of Israel’s King Hoshea, son of Elah), King Shalmaneser of Assyria marched up against Samaria and besieged it.
2KI 18:10 After three years he captured it (in the sixth year of Hezekiah’s reign); in the ninth year of King Hoshea’s reign over Israel Samaria was captured.
2KI 18:11 The king of Assyria deported the people of Israel to Assyria. He settled them in Halah, along the Habor (the river of Gozan), and in the cities of the Medes.
2KI 18:12 This happened because they did not obey the Lord their God and broke his agreement with them. They did not pay attention to and obey all that Moses, the Lord’s servant, had commanded.
2KI 18:13 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah’s reign, King Sennacherib of Assyria marched up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
2KI 18:14 King Hezekiah of Judah sent this message to the king of Assyria, who was at Lachish, “I have violated our treaty. If you leave, I will do whatever you demand.” So the king of Assyria demanded that King Hezekiah of Judah pay three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
2KI 18:15 Hezekiah gave him all the silver in the Lord’s temple and in the treasuries of the royal palace.
2KI 18:16 At that time King Hezekiah of Judah stripped the metal overlays from the doors of the Lord’s temple and from the posts which he had plated and gave them to the king of Assyria.
2KI 18:17 The king of Assyria sent his commanding general, the chief eunuch, and the chief adviser from Lachish to King Hezekiah in Jerusalem, along with a large army. They went up and arrived at Jerusalem. They went and stood at the conduit of the upper pool which is located on the road to the field where they wash and dry cloth.
2KI 18:18 They summoned the king, so Eliakim son of Hilkiah, the palace supervisor, accompanied by Shebna the scribe and Joah son of Asaph, the secretary, went out to meet them.
2KI 18:19 The chief adviser said to them, “Tell Hezekiah: ‘This is what the great king, the king of Assyria, says: “What is your source of confidence?
2KI 18:20 Your claim to have a strategy and military strength is just empty talk. In whom are you trusting that you would dare to rebel against me?
2KI 18:21 Now look, you must be trusting in Egypt, that splintered reed staff. If a man leans for support on it, it punctures his hand and wounds him. That is what Pharaoh king of Egypt does to all who trust in him.
2KI 18:22 Perhaps you will tell me, ‘We are trusting in the Lord our God.’ But Hezekiah is the one who eliminated his high places and altars and then told the people of Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You must worship at this altar in Jerusalem.’
2KI 18:23 Now make a deal with my master the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, provided you can find enough riders for them.
2KI 18:24 Certainly you will not refuse one of my master’s minor officials and trust in Egypt for chariots and horsemen.
2KI 18:25 Furthermore it was by the command of the Lord that I marched up against this place to destroy it. The Lord told me, ‘March up against this land and destroy it.’”’”
2KI 18:26 Eliakim son of Hilkiah, Shebna, and Joah said to the chief adviser, “Speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. Don’t speak with us in the Judahite dialect in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.”
2KI 18:27 But the chief adviser said to them, “My master did not send me to speak these words only to your master and to you. His message is also for the men who sit on the wall, for they will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you.”
2KI 18:28 The chief adviser then stood there and called out loudly in the Judahite dialect, “Listen to the message of the great king, the king of Assyria.
2KI 18:29 This is what the king says: ‘Don’t let Hezekiah mislead you, for he is not able to rescue you from my hand!
2KI 18:30 Don’t let Hezekiah talk you into trusting in the Lord when he says, “The Lord will certainly rescue us; this city will not be handed over to the king of Assyria.”
2KI 18:31 Don’t listen to Hezekiah!’ For this is what the king of Assyria says, ‘Send me a token of your submission and surrender to me. Then each of you may eat from his own vine and fig tree and drink water from his own cistern,
2KI 18:32 until I come and take you to a land just like your own – a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and honey. Then you will live and not die. Don’t listen to Hezekiah, for he is misleading you when he says, “The Lord will rescue us.”
2KI 18:33 Have any of the gods of the nations actually rescued his land from the power of the king of Assyria?
2KI 18:34 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah? Indeed, did any gods rescue Samaria from my power?
2KI 18:35 Who among all the gods of the lands has rescued their lands from my power? So how can the Lord rescue Jerusalem from my power?’”
2KI 18:36 The people were silent and did not respond, for the king had ordered, “Don’t respond to him.”
2KI 18:37 Eliakim son of Hilkiah, the palace supervisor, accompanied by Shebna the scribe and Joah son of Asaph, the secretary, went to Hezekiah with their clothes torn and reported to him what the chief adviser had said.
2KI 19:1 When King Hezekiah heard this, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and went to the Lord’s temple.
2KI 19:2 He sent Eliakim the palace supervisor, Shebna the scribe, and the leading priests, clothed in sackcloth, with this message to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz:
2KI 19:3 “This is what Hezekiah says: ‘This is a day of distress, insults, and humiliation, as when a baby is ready to leave the birth canal, but the mother lacks the strength to push it through.
2KI 19:4 Perhaps the Lord your God will hear all these things the chief adviser has spoken on behalf of his master, the king of Assyria, who sent him to taunt the living God. When the Lord your God hears, perhaps he will punish him for the things he has said. So pray for this remnant that remains.’”
2KI 19:5 When King Hezekiah’s servants came to Isaiah,
2KI 19:6 Isaiah said to them, “Tell your master this: ‘This is what the Lord says: “Don’t be afraid because of the things you have heard – these insults the king of Assyria’s servants have hurled against me.
2KI 19:7 Look, I will take control of his mind; he will receive a report and return to his own land. I will cut him down with a sword in his own land.”’”
2KI 19:8 When the chief adviser heard the king of Assyria had departed from Lachish, he left and went to Libnah, where the king was campaigning.
2KI 19:9 The king heard that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was marching out to fight him. He again sent messengers to Hezekiah, ordering them:
2KI 19:10 “Tell King Hezekiah of Judah this: ‘Don’t let your God in whom you trust mislead you when he says, “Jerusalem will not be handed over to the king of Assyria.”
2KI 19:11 Certainly you have heard how the kings of Assyria have annihilated all lands. Do you really think you will be rescued?
2KI 19:12 Were the nations whom my ancestors destroyed – the nations of Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the people of Eden in Telassar – rescued by their gods?
2KI 19:13 Where are the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, and the king of Lair, Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah?’”
2KI 19:14 Hezekiah took the letter from the messengers and read it. Then Hezekiah went up to the Lord’s temple and spread it out before the Lord.
2KI 19:15 Hezekiah prayed before the Lord: “Lord God of Israel, who is enthroned on the cherubs! You alone are God over all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the sky and the earth.
2KI 19:16 Pay attention, Lord, and hear! Open your eyes, Lord, and observe! Listen to the message Sennacherib sent and how he taunts the living God!
2KI 19:17 It is true, Lord, that the kings of Assyria have destroyed the nations and their lands.
2KI 19:18 They have burned the gods of the nations, for they are not really gods, but only the product of human hands manufactured from wood and stone. That is why the Assyrians could destroy them.
2KI 19:19 Now, O Lord our God, rescue us from his power, so that all the kingdoms of the earth will know that you, Lord, are the only God.”
2KI 19:20 Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to Hezekiah: “This is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘I have heard your prayer concerning King Sennacherib of Assyria.
2KI 19:21 This is what the Lord says about him: “The virgin daughter Zion despises you, she makes fun of you; Daughter Jerusalem shakes her head after you.
2KI 19:22 Whom have you taunted and hurled insults at? At whom have you shouted, and looked so arrogantly? At the Holy One of Israel!
2KI 19:23 Through your messengers you taunted the sovereign master, ‘With my many chariots I climbed up the high mountains, the slopes of Lebanon. I cut down its tall cedars, and its best evergreens. I invaded its most remote regions, its thickest woods.
2KI 19:24 I dug wells and drank water in foreign lands. With the soles of my feet I dried up all the rivers of Egypt.’
2KI 19:25 Certainly you must have heard! Long ago I worked it out, In ancient times I planned it; and now I am bringing it to pass. The plan is this: Fortified cities will crash into heaps of ruins.
2KI 19:26 Their residents are powerless, they are terrified and ashamed. They are as short-lived as plants in the field, or green vegetation. They are as short-lived as grass on the rooftops when it is scorched by the east wind.
2KI 19:27 I know where you live, and everything you do.
2KI 19:28 Because you rage against me, and the uproar you create has reached my ears; I will put my hook in your nose, and my bridle between your lips, and I will lead you back the way you came.”
2KI 19:29 This will be your confirmation that I have spoken the truth: This year you will eat what grows wild, and next year what grows on its own from that. But in the third year you will plant seed and harvest crops; you will plant vines and consume their produce.
2KI 19:30 Those who remain in Judah will take root in the ground and bear fruit.
2KI 19:31 For a remnant will leave Jerusalem; survivors will come out of Mount Zion. The intense devotion of the sovereign Lord to his people will accomplish this.
2KI 19:32 So this is what the Lord says about the king of Assyria: “He will not enter this city, nor will he shoot an arrow here. He will not attack it with his shield-carrying warriors, nor will he build siege works against it.
2KI 19:33 He will go back the way he came. He will not enter this city,” says the Lord.
2KI 19:34 I will shield this city and rescue it for the sake of my reputation and because of my promise to David my servant.’”
2KI 19:35 That very night the Lord’s messenger went out and killed 185,000 men in the Assyrian camp. When they got up early the next morning, there were all the corpses.
2KI 19:36 So King Sennacherib of Assyria broke camp and went on his way. He went home and stayed in Nineveh.
2KI 19:37 One day, as he was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer struck him down with the sword. They escaped to the land of Ararat; his son Esarhaddon replaced him as king.
2KI 20:1 In those days Hezekiah was stricken with a terminal illness. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz visited him and told him, “This is what the Lord says, ‘Give your household instructions, for you are about to die; you will not get well.’”
2KI 20:2 He turned his face to the wall and prayed to the Lord,
2KI 20:3 “Please, Lord. Remember how I have served you faithfully and with wholehearted devotion, and how I have carried out your will.” Then Hezekiah wept bitterly.
2KI 20:4 Isaiah was still in the middle courtyard when the Lord told him,
2KI 20:5 “Go back and tell Hezekiah, the leader of my people: ‘This is what the Lord God of your ancestor David says: “I have heard your prayer; I have seen your tears. Look, I will heal you. The day after tomorrow you will go up to the Lord’s temple.
2KI 20:6 I will add fifteen years to your life and rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria. I will shield this city for the sake of my reputation and because of my promise to David my servant.”’”
2KI 20:7 Isaiah ordered, “Get a fig cake.” So they did as he ordered and placed it on the ulcerated sore, and he recovered.
2KI 20:8 Hezekiah had said to Isaiah, “What is the confirming sign that the Lord will heal me and that I will go up to the Lord’s temple the day after tomorrow?”
2KI 20:9 Isaiah replied, “This is your sign from the Lord confirming that the Lord will do what he has said. Do you want the shadow to move ahead ten steps or to go back ten steps?”
2KI 20:10 Hezekiah answered, “It is easy for the shadow to lengthen ten steps, but not for it to go back ten steps.”
2KI 20:11 Isaiah the prophet called out to the Lord, and the Lord made the shadow go back ten steps on the stairs of Ahaz.
2KI 20:12 At that time Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, for he had heard that Hezekiah was ill.
2KI 20:13 Hezekiah welcomed them and showed them his whole storehouse, with its silver, gold, spices, and high quality olive oil, as well as his armory and everything in his treasuries. Hezekiah showed them everything in his palace and in his whole kingdom.
2KI 20:14 Isaiah the prophet visited King Hezekiah and asked him, “What did these men say? Where do they come from?” Hezekiah replied, “They come from the distant land of Babylon.”
2KI 20:15 Isaiah asked, “What have they seen in your palace?” Hezekiah replied, “They have seen everything in my palace. I showed them everything in my treasuries.”
2KI 20:16 Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Listen to the word of the Lord,
2KI 20:17 ‘Look, a time is coming when everything in your palace and the things your ancestors have accumulated to this day will be carried away to Babylon; nothing will be left,’ says the Lord.
2KI 20:18 ‘Some of your very own descendants whom you father will be taken away and will be made eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”
2KI 20:19 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The Lord’s word which you have announced is appropriate.” Then he added, “At least there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
2KI 20:20 The rest of the events of Hezekiah’s reign and all his accomplishments, including how he built a pool and conduit to bring water into the city, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 20:21 Hezekiah passed away and his son Manasseh replaced him as king.
2KI 21:1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned for fifty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother was Hephzibah.
2KI 21:2 He did evil in the sight of the Lord and committed the same horrible sins practiced by the nations whom the Lord drove out from before the Israelites.
2KI 21:3 He rebuilt the high places that his father Hezekiah had destroyed; he set up altars for Baal and made an Asherah pole just like King Ahab of Israel had done. He bowed down to all the stars in the sky and worshiped them.
2KI 21:4 He built altars in the Lord’s temple, about which the Lord had said, “Jerusalem will be my home.”
2KI 21:5 In the two courtyards of the Lord’s temple he built altars for all the stars in the sky.
2KI 21:6 He passed his son through the fire and practiced divination and omen reading. He set up a ritual pit to conjure up underworld spirits, and appointed magicians to supervise it. He did a great amount of evil in the sight of the Lord, provoking him to anger.
2KI 21:7 He put an idol of Asherah he had made in the temple, about which the Lord had said to David and to his son Solomon, “This temple in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will be my permanent home.
2KI 21:8 I will not make Israel again leave the land I gave to their ancestors, provided that they carefully obey all I commanded them, the whole law my servant Moses ordered them to obey.”
2KI 21:9 But they did not obey, and Manasseh misled them so that they sinned more than the nations whom the Lord had destroyed from before the Israelites.
2KI 21:10 So the Lord announced through his servants the prophets:
2KI 21:11 “King Manasseh of Judah has committed horrible sins. He has sinned more than the Amorites before him and has encouraged Judah to sin by worshiping his disgusting idols.
2KI 21:12 So this is what the Lord God of Israel says, ‘I am about to bring disaster on Jerusalem and Judah. The news will reverberate in the ears of those who hear about it.
2KI 21:13 I will destroy Jerusalem the same way I did Samaria and the dynasty of Ahab. I will wipe Jerusalem clean, just as one wipes a plate on both sides.
2KI 21:14 I will abandon this last remaining tribe among my people and hand them over to their enemies; they will be plundered and robbed by all their enemies,
2KI 21:15 because they have done evil in my sight and have angered me from the time their ancestors left Egypt right up to this very day!’”
2KI 21:16 Furthermore Manasseh killed so many innocent people, he stained Jerusalem with their blood from end to end, in addition to encouraging Judah to sin by doing evil in the sight of the Lord.
2KI 21:17 The rest of the events of Manasseh’s reign and all his accomplishments, as well as the sinful acts he committed, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 21:18 Manasseh passed away and was buried in his palace garden, the garden of Uzzah, and his son Amon replaced him as king.
2KI 21:19 Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem. His mother was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz, from Jotbah.
2KI 21:20 He did evil in the sight of the Lord, just like his father Manasseh had done.
2KI 21:21 He followed in the footsteps of his father and worshiped and bowed down to the disgusting idols which his father had worshiped.
2KI 21:22 He abandoned the Lord God of his ancestors and did not follow the Lord’s instructions.
2KI 21:23 Amon’s servants conspired against him and killed the king in his palace.
2KI 21:24 The people of the land executed all those who had conspired against King Amon, and they made his son Josiah king in his place.
2KI 21:25 The rest of Amon’s accomplishments are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 21:26 He was buried in his tomb in the garden of Uzzah, and his son Josiah replaced him as king.
2KI 22:1 Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for thirty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother was Jedidah, daughter of Adaiah, from Bozkath.
2KI 22:2 He did what the Lord approved and followed in his ancestor David’s footsteps; he did not deviate to the right or the left.
2KI 22:3 In the eighteenth year of King Josiah’s reign, the king sent the scribe Shaphan son of Azaliah, son of Meshullam, to the Lord’s temple with these orders:
2KI 22:4 “Go up to Hilkiah the high priest and have him melt down the silver that has been brought by the people to the Lord’s temple and has been collected by the guards at the door.
2KI 22:5 Have them hand it over to the construction foremen assigned to the Lord’s temple. They in turn should pay the temple workers to repair it,
2KI 22:6 including craftsmen, builders, and masons, and should buy wood and chiseled stone for the repair work.
2KI 22:7 Do not audit the foremen who disburse the silver, for they are honest.”
2KI 22:8 Hilkiah the high priest informed Shaphan the scribe, “I found the law scroll in the Lord’s temple.” Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan and he read it.
2KI 22:9 Shaphan the scribe went to the king and reported, “Your servants melted down the silver in the temple and handed it over to the construction foremen assigned to the Lord’s temple.”
2KI 22:10 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll.” Shaphan read it out loud before the king.
2KI 22:11 When the king heard the words of the law scroll, he tore his clothes.
2KI 22:12 The king ordered Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Acbor son of Micaiah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s servant,
2KI 22:13 “Go, seek an oracle from the Lord for me and the people – for all Judah. Find out about the words of this scroll that has been discovered. For the Lord’s fury has been ignited against us, because our ancestors have not obeyed the words of this scroll by doing all that it instructs us to do.”
2KI 22:14 So Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam, Acbor, Shaphan, and Asaiah went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shullam son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, the supervisor of the wardrobe. (She lived in Jerusalem in the Mishneh district.) They stated their business,
2KI 22:15 and she said to them: “This is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘Say this to the man who sent you to me:
2KI 22:16 “This is what the Lord says: ‘I am about to bring disaster on this place and its residents, the details of which are recorded in the scroll which the king of Judah has read.
2KI 22:17 This will happen because they have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to other gods, angering me with all the idols they have made. My anger will ignite against this place and will not be extinguished!’”
2KI 22:18 Say this to the king of Judah, who sent you to seek an oracle from the Lord: “This is what the Lord God of Israel says concerning the words you have heard:
2KI 22:19 ‘You displayed a sensitive spirit and humbled yourself before the Lord when you heard how I intended to make this place and its residents into an appalling example of an accursed people. You tore your clothes and wept before me, and I have heard you,’ says the Lord.
2KI 22:20 ‘Therefore I will allow you to die and be buried in peace. You will not have to witness all the disaster I will bring on this place.’”’” Then they reported back to the king.
2KI 23:1 The king summoned all the leaders of Judah and Jerusalem.
2KI 23:2 The king went up to the Lord’s temple, accompanied by all the people of Judah, all the residents of Jerusalem, the priests, and the prophets. All the people were there, from the youngest to the oldest. He read aloud all the words of the scroll of the covenant that had been discovered in the Lord’s temple.
2KI 23:3 The king stood by the pillar and renewed the covenant before the Lord, agreeing to follow the Lord and to obey his commandments, laws, and rules with all his heart and being, by carrying out the terms of this covenant recorded on this scroll. All the people agreed to keep the covenant.
2KI 23:4 The king ordered Hilkiah the high priest, the high-ranking priests, and the guards to bring out of the Lord’s temple all the items that were used in the worship of Baal, Asherah, and all the stars of the sky. The king burned them outside of Jerusalem in the terraces of Kidron, and carried their ashes to Bethel.
2KI 23:5 He eliminated the pagan priests whom the kings of Judah had appointed to offer sacrifices on the high places in the cities of Judah and in the area right around Jerusalem. (They offered sacrifices to Baal, the sun god, the moon god, the constellations, and all the stars in the sky.)
2KI 23:6 He removed the Asherah pole from the Lord’s temple and took it outside Jerusalem to the Kidron Valley, where he burned it. He smashed it to dust and then threw the dust in the public graveyard.
2KI 23:7 He tore down the quarters of the male cultic prostitutes in the Lord’s temple, where women were weaving shrines for Asherah.
2KI 23:8 He brought all the priests from the cities of Judah and ruined the high places where the priests had offered sacrifices, from Geba to Beer Sheba. He tore down the high place of the goat idols situated at the entrance of the gate of Joshua, the city official, on the left side of the city gate.
2KI 23:9 (Now the priests of the high places did not go up to the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem, but they did eat unleavened cakes among their fellow priests.)
2KI 23:10 The king ruined Topheth in the Valley of Ben Hinnom so that no one could pass his son or his daughter through the fire to Molech.
2KI 23:11 He removed from the entrance to the Lord’s temple the statues of horses that the kings of Judah had placed there in honor of the sun god. (They were kept near the room of Nathan Melech the eunuch, which was situated among the courtyards.) He burned up the chariots devoted to the sun god.
2KI 23:12 The king tore down the altars the kings of Judah had set up on the roof of Ahaz’s upper room, as well as the altars Manasseh had set up in the two courtyards of the Lord’s temple. He crushed them up and threw the dust in the Kidron Valley.
2KI 23:13 The king ruined the high places east of Jerusalem, south of the Mount of Destruction, that King Solomon of Israel had built for the detestable Sidonian goddess Astarte, the detestable Moabite god Chemosh, and the horrible Ammonite god Milcom.
2KI 23:14 He smashed the sacred pillars to bits, cut down the Asherah pole, and filled those shrines with human bones.
2KI 23:15 He also tore down the altar in Bethel at the high place made by Jeroboam son of Nebat, who encouraged Israel to sin. He burned all the combustible items at that high place and crushed them to dust; including the Asherah pole.
2KI 23:16 When Josiah turned around, he saw the tombs there on the hill. So he ordered the bones from the tombs to be brought; he burned them on the altar and defiled it. This fulfilled the Lord’s announcement made by the prophet while Jeroboam stood by the altar during a festival. King Josiah turned and saw the grave of the prophet who had foretold this.
2KI 23:17 He asked, “What is this grave marker I see?” The men from the city replied, “It’s the grave of the prophet who came from Judah and foretold these very things you have done to the altar of Bethel.”
2KI 23:18 The king said, “Leave it alone! No one must touch his bones.” So they left his bones undisturbed, as well as the bones of the Israelite prophet buried beside him.
2KI 23:19 Josiah also removed all the shrines on the high places in the cities of Samaria. The kings of Israel had made them and angered the Lord. He did to them what he had done to the high place in Bethel.
2KI 23:20 He sacrificed all the priests of the high places on the altars located there, and burned human bones on them. Then he returned to Jerusalem.
2KI 23:21 The king ordered all the people, “Observe the Passover of the Lord your God, as prescribed in this scroll of the covenant.”
2KI 23:22 He issued this edict because a Passover like this had not been observed since the days of the judges; it was neglected for the entire period of the kings of Israel and Judah.
2KI 23:23 But in the eighteenth year of King Josiah’s reign, such a Passover of the Lord was observed in Jerusalem.
2KI 23:24 Josiah also got rid of the ritual pits used to conjure up spirits, the magicians, personal idols, disgusting images, and all the detestable idols that had appeared in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem. In this way he carried out the terms of the law recorded on the scroll that Hilkiah the priest had discovered in the Lord’s temple.
2KI 23:25 No king before or after repented before the Lord as he did, with his whole heart, soul, and being in accordance with the whole law of Moses.
2KI 23:26 Yet the Lord’s great anger against Judah did not subside; he was still infuriated by all the things Manasseh had done.
2KI 23:27 The Lord announced, “I will also spurn Judah, just as I spurned Israel. I will reject this city that I chose – both Jerusalem and the temple, about which I said, “I will live there.”
2KI 23:28 The rest of the events of Josiah’s reign and all his accomplishments are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 23:29 During Josiah’s reign Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt marched toward the Euphrates River to help the king of Assyria. King Josiah marched out to fight him, but Necho killed him at Megiddo when he saw him.
2KI 23:30 His servants transported his dead body from Megiddo in a chariot and brought it to Jerusalem, where they buried him in his tomb. The people of the land took Josiah’s son Jehoahaz, poured olive oil on his head, and made him king in his father’s place.
2KI 23:31 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah, from Libnah.
2KI 23:32 He did evil in the sight of the Lord as his ancestors had done.
2KI 23:33 Pharaoh Necho imprisoned him in Riblah in the land of Hamath and prevented him from ruling in Jerusalem. He imposed on the land a special tax of one hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
2KI 23:34 Pharaoh Necho made Josiah’s son Eliakim king in Josiah’s place, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. He took Jehoahaz to Egypt, where he died.
2KI 23:35 Jehoiakim paid Pharaoh the required amount of silver and gold, but to meet Pharaoh’s demands Jehoiakim had to tax the land. He collected an assessed amount from each man among the people of the land in order to pay Pharaoh Necho.
2KI 23:36 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother was Zebidah the daughter of Pedaiah, from Rumah.
2KI 23:37 He did evil in the sight of the Lord as his ancestors had done.
2KI 24:1 During Jehoiakim’s reign, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon attacked. Jehoiakim was his subject for three years, but then he rebelled against him.
2KI 24:2 The Lord sent against him Babylonian, Syrian, Moabite, and Ammonite raiding bands; he sent them to destroy Judah, as he had warned he would do through his servants the prophets.
2KI 24:3 Just as the Lord had announced, he rejected Judah because of all the sins which Manasseh had committed.
2KI 24:4 Because he killed innocent people and stained Jerusalem with their blood, the Lord was unwilling to forgive them.
2KI 24:5 The rest of the events of Jehoiakim’s reign and all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah.
2KI 24:6 He passed away and his son Jehoiachin replaced him as king.
2KI 24:7 The king of Egypt did not march out from his land again, for the king of Babylon conquered all the territory that the king of Egypt had formerly controlled between the Brook of Egypt and the Euphrates River.
2KI 24:8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan, from Jerusalem.
2KI 24:9 He did evil in the sight of the Lord as his ancestors had done.
2KI 24:10 At that time the generals of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon marched to Jerusalem and besieged the city.
2KI 24:11 King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to the city while his generals were besieging it.
2KI 24:12 King Jehoiachin of Judah, along with his mother, his servants, his officials, and his eunuchs surrendered to the king of Babylon. The king of Babylon, in the eighth year of his reign, took Jehoiachin prisoner.
2KI 24:13 Nebuchadnezzar took from there all the riches in the treasuries of the Lord’s temple and of the royal palace. He removed all the gold items which King Solomon of Israel had made for the Lord’s temple, just as the Lord had warned.
2KI 24:14 He deported all the residents of Jerusalem, including all the officials and all the soldiers (10,000 people in all). This included all the craftsmen and those who worked with metal. No one was left except for the poorest among the people of the land.
2KI 24:15 He deported Jehoiachin from Jerusalem to Babylon, along with the king’s mother and wives, his eunuchs, and the high-ranking officials of the land.
2KI 24:16 The king of Babylon deported to Babylon all the soldiers (there were 7,000), as well as 1,000 craftsmen and metal workers. This included all the best warriors.
2KI 24:17 The king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin’s uncle, king in Jehoiachin’s place. He renamed him Zedekiah.
2KI 24:18 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he ruled for eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah, from Libnah.
2KI 24:19 He did evil in the sight of the Lord, as Jehoiakim had done.
2KI 24:20 What follows is a record of what happened to Jerusalem and Judah because of the Lord’s anger; he finally threw them out of his presence. Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
2KI 25:1 So King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came against Jerusalem with his whole army and set up camp outside it. They built siege ramps all around it. He arrived on the tenth day of the tenth month in the ninth year of Zedekiah’s reign.
2KI 25:2 The city remained under siege until King Zedekiah’s eleventh year.
2KI 25:3 By the ninth day of the fourth month the famine in the city was so severe the residents had no food.
2KI 25:4 The enemy broke through the city walls, and all the soldiers tried to escape. They left the city during the night. They went through the gate between the two walls that is near the king’s garden. (The Babylonians were all around the city.) Then they headed for the Jordan Valley.
2KI 25:5 But the Babylonian army chased after the king. They caught up with him in the plains of Jericho, and his entire army deserted him.
2KI 25:6 They captured the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah, where he passed sentence on him.
2KI 25:7 Zedekiah’s sons were executed while Zedekiah was forced to watch. The king of Babylon then had Zedekiah’s eyes put out, bound him in bronze chains, and carried him off to Babylon.
2KI 25:8 On the seventh day of the fifth month, in the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard who served the king of Babylon, arrived in Jerusalem.
2KI 25:9 He burned down the Lord’s temple, the royal palace, and all the houses in Jerusalem, including every large house.
2KI 25:10 The whole Babylonian army that came with the captain of the royal guard tore down the walls that surrounded Jerusalem.
2KI 25:11 Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, deported the rest of the people who were left in the city, those who had deserted to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the craftsmen.
2KI 25:12 But he left behind some of the poor of the land and gave them fields and vineyards.
2KI 25:13 The Babylonians broke the two bronze pillars in the Lord’s temple, as well as the movable stands and the big bronze basin called the “The Sea.” They took the bronze to Babylon.
2KI 25:14 They also took the pots, shovels, trimming shears, pans, and all the bronze utensils used by the priests.
2KI 25:15 The captain of the royal guard took the golden and silver censers and basins.
2KI 25:16 The bronze of the items that King Solomon made for the Lord’s temple – including the two pillars, the big bronze basin called “The Sea,” the twelve bronze bulls under “The Sea,” and the movable stands – was too heavy to be weighed.
2KI 25:17 Each of the pillars was about twenty-seven feet high. The bronze top of one pillar was about four and a half feet high and had bronze latticework and pomegranate shaped ornaments all around it. The second pillar with its latticework was like it.
2KI 25:18 The captain of the royal guard took Seraiah the chief priest and Zephaniah, the priest who was second in rank, and the three doorkeepers.
2KI 25:19 From the city he took a eunuch who was in charge of the soldiers, five of the king’s advisers who were discovered in the city, an official army secretary who drafted citizens for military service, and sixty citizens from the people of the land who were discovered in the city.
2KI 25:20 Nebuzaradan, captain of the royal guard, took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah.
2KI 25:21 The king of Babylon ordered them to be executed at Riblah in the territory of Hamath. So Judah was deported from its land.
2KI 25:22 Now King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, as governor over the people whom he allowed to remain in the land of Judah.
2KI 25:23 All of the officers of the Judahite army and their troops heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah to govern. So they came to Gedaliah at Mizpah. The officers who came were Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan son of Kareah, Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah son of the Maacathite.
2KI 25:24 Gedaliah took an oath so as to give them and their troops some assurance of safety. He said, “You don’t need to be afraid to submit to the Babylonian officials. Settle down in the land and submit to the king of Babylon. Then things will go well for you.”
2KI 25:25 But in the seventh month Ishmael son of Nethaniah, son of Elishama, who was a member of the royal family, came with ten of his men and murdered Gedaliah, as well as the Judeans and Babylonians who were with him at Mizpah.
2KI 25:26 Then all the people, from the youngest to the oldest, as well as the army officers, left for Egypt, because they were afraid of what the Babylonians might do.
2KI 25:27 In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah, on the twenty-seventh day of the twelfth month, King Evil-Merodach of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, pardoned King Jehoiachin of Judah and released him from prison.
2KI 25:28 He spoke kindly to him and gave him a more prestigious position than the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
2KI 25:29 Jehoiachin took off his prison clothes and ate daily in the king’s presence for the rest of his life.
2KI 25:30 He was given daily provisions by the king for the rest of his life until the day he died.
1CH 1:1 Adam, Seth, Enosh,
1CH 1:2 Kenan, Mahalalel, Jered,
1CH 1:3 Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech,
1CH 1:4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
1CH 1:5 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.
1CH 1:6 The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
1CH 1:7 The sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittites, and the Rodanites.
1CH 1:8 The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
1CH 1:9 The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
1CH 1:10 Cush was the father of Nimrod, who established himself as a mighty warrior on earth.
1CH 1:11 Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites,
1CH 1:12 Pathrusites, Casluhites (from whom the Philistines descended ), and the Caphtorites.
1CH 1:13 Canaan was the father of Sidon – his firstborn – and Heth,
1CH 1:14 as well as the Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites,
1CH 1:15 Hivites, Arkites, Sinites,
1CH 1:16 Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hamathites.
1CH 1:17 The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram. The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Meshech.
1CH 1:18 Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber.
1CH 1:19 Two sons were born to Eber: the first was named Peleg, for during his lifetime the earth was divided; his brother’s name was Joktan.
1CH 1:20 Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
1CH 1:21 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
1CH 1:22 Ebal, Abimael, Sheba,
1CH 1:23 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.
1CH 1:24 Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,
1CH 1:25 Eber, Peleg, Reu,
1CH 1:26 Serug, Nahor, Terah,
1CH 1:27 Abram (that is, Abraham).
1CH 1:28 The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael.
1CH 1:29 These were their descendants: Ishmael’s firstborn son was Nebaioth; the others were Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
1CH 1:30 Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema,
1CH 1:31 Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These were the sons of Ishmael.
1CH 1:32 The sons to whom Keturah, Abraham’s concubine, gave birth: Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, Shuah. The sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.
1CH 1:33 The sons of Midian: Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.
1CH 1:34 Abraham was the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.
1CH 1:35 The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
1CH 1:36 The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, Omar, Zephi, Gatam, Kenaz, and (by Timna) Amalek.
1CH 1:37 The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
1CH 1:38 The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan.
1CH 1:39 The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam. (Timna was Lotan’s sister.)
1CH 1:40 The sons of Shobal: Alyan, Manahath, Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah.
1CH 1:41 The son of Anah: Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hamran, Eshban, Ithran, and Keran.
1CH 1:42 The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
1CH 1:43 These were the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king ruled over the Israelites: Bela son of Beor; the name of his city was Dinhabah.
1CH 1:44 When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah, succeeded him.
1CH 1:45 When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites succeeded him.
1CH 1:46 When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad succeeded him. He struck down the Midianites in the plains of Moab; the name of his city was Avith.
1CH 1:47 When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah succeeded him.
1CH 1:48 When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth on the river succeeded him.
1CH 1:49 When Shaul died, Baal-Hanan son of Achbor succeeded him.
1CH 1:50 When Baal-Hanan died, Hadad succeeded him; the name of his city was Pai. His wife was Mehetabel, daughter of Matred, daughter of Me-Zahab.
1CH 1:51 Hadad died. The tribal chiefs of Edom were: Timna, Alvah, Jetheth,
1CH 1:52 Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon,
1CH 1:53 Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar,
1CH 1:54 Magdiel, Iram. These were the tribal chiefs of Edom.
1CH 2:1 These were the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah; Issachar and Zebulun;
1CH 2:2 Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin; Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
1CH 2:3 The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, and Shelah. These three were born to him by Bathshua, a Canaanite woman. Er, Judah’s firstborn, displeased the Lord, so the Lord killed him.
1CH 2:4 Tamar, Judah’s daughter-in-law, bore to him Perez and Zerah. Judah had five sons in all.
1CH 2:5 The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul.
1CH 2:6 The sons of Zerah: Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Kalkol, Dara – five in all.
1CH 2:7 The son of Carmi: Achan, who brought the disaster on Israel when he stole what was devoted to God.
1CH 2:8 The son of Ethan: Azariah.
1CH 2:9 The sons born to Hezron: Jerahmeel, Ram, and Caleb.
1CH 2:10 Ram was the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab was the father of Nahshon, the tribal chief of Judah.
1CH 2:11 Nahshon was the father of Salma, and Salma was the father of Boaz.
1CH 2:12 Boaz was the father of Obed, and Obed was the father of Jesse.
1CH 2:13 Jesse was the father of Eliab, his firstborn; Abinadab was born second, Shimea third,
1CH 2:14 Nethanel fourth, Raddai fifth,
1CH 2:15 Ozem sixth, David seventh.
1CH 2:16 Their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. Zeruiah’s three sons were Abshai, Joab, and Asahel.
1CH 2:17 Abigail bore Amasa, whose father was Jether the Ishmaelite.
1CH 2:18 Caleb son of Hezron fathered sons by his wife Azubah (also known as Jerioth). Her sons were Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon.
1CH 2:19 When Azubah died, Caleb married Ephrath, who bore him Hur.
1CH 2:20 Hur was the father of Uri, and Uri was the father of Bezalel.
1CH 2:21 Later Hezron had sexual relations with the daughter of Makir, the father of Gilead. (He had married her when he was sixty years old.) She bore him Segub.
1CH 2:22 Segub was the father of Jair, who owned twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead.
1CH 2:23 (Geshur and Aram captured the towns of Jair, along with Kenath and its sixty surrounding towns.) All these were descendants of Makir, the father of Gilead.
1CH 2:24 After Hezron’s death, Caleb had sexual relations with Ephrath, his father Hezron’s widow, and she bore to him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.
1CH 2:25 The sons of Jerahmeel, Hezron’s firstborn, were Ram, the firstborn, Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah.
1CH 2:26 Jerahmeel had another wife named Atarah; she was Onam’s mother.
1CH 2:27 The sons of Ram, Jerahmeel’s firstborn, were Maaz, Jamin, and Eker.
1CH 2:28 The sons of Onam were Shammai and Jada. The sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.
1CH 2:29 Abishur’s wife was Abihail, who bore him Ahban and Molid.
1CH 2:30 The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim. (Seled died without having sons.)
1CH 2:31 The son of Appaim: Ishi. The son of Ishi: Sheshan. The son of Sheshan: Ahlai.
1CH 2:32 The sons of Jada, Shammai’s brother: Jether and Jonathan. (Jether died without having sons.)
1CH 2:33 The sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the descendants of Jerahmeel.
1CH 2:34 Sheshan had no sons, only daughters. Sheshan had an Egyptian servant named Jarha.
1CH 2:35 Sheshan gave his daughter to his servant Jarha as a wife; she bore him Attai.
1CH 2:36 Attai was the father of Nathan, and Nathan was the father of Zabad.
1CH 2:37 Zabad was the father of Ephlal, and Ephlal was the father of Obed.
1CH 2:38 Obed was the father of Jehu, and Jehu was the father of Azariah.
1CH 2:39 Azariah was the father of Helez, and Helez was the father of Eleasah.
1CH 2:40 Eleasah was the father of Sismai, and Sismai was the father of Shallum.
1CH 2:41 Shallum was the father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah was the father of Elishama.
1CH 2:42 The sons of Caleb, Jerahmeel’s brother: His firstborn Mesha, the father of Ziph, and his second son Mareshah, the father of Hebron.
1CH 2:43 The sons of Hebron: Korah, Tappuah, Rekem, and Shema.
1CH 2:44 Shema was the father of Raham, the father of Jorkeam. Rekem was the father of Shammai.
1CH 2:45 Shammai’s son was Maon, who was the father of Beth-Zur.
1CH 2:46 Caleb’s concubine Ephah bore Haran, Moza, and Gazez. Haran was the father of Gazez.
1CH 2:47 The sons of Jahdai: Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph.
1CH 2:48 Caleb’s concubine Maacah bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
1CH 2:49 She also bore Shaaph the father of Madmannah and Sheva the father of Machbenah and Gibea. Caleb’s daughter was Achsah.
1CH 2:50 These were the descendants of Caleb. The sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrath: Shobal, the father of Kiriath Jearim,
1CH 2:51 Salma, the father of Bethlehem, Hareph, the father of Beth-Gader.
1CH 2:52 The sons of Shobal, the father of Kiriath Jearim, were Haroeh, half of the Manahathites,
1CH 2:53 the clans of Kiriath Jearim – the Ithrites, Puthites, Shumathites, and Mishraites. (The Zorathites and Eshtaolites descended from these groups.)
1CH 2:54 The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, the Netophathites, Atroth Beth-Joab, half the Manahathites, the Zorites,
1CH 2:55 and the clans of the scribes who lived in Jabez: the Tirathites, Shimeathites, and Sucathites. These are the Kenites who descended from Hammath, the father of Beth-Rechab.
1CH 3:1 These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: The firstborn was Amnon, whose mother was Ahinoam from Jezreel; the second was Daniel, whose mother was Abigail from Carmel;
1CH 3:2 the third was Absalom whose mother was Maacah, daughter of King Talmai of Geshur; the fourth was Adonijah, whose mother was Haggith;
1CH 3:3 the fifth was Shephatiah, whose mother was Abital; the sixth was Ithream, whose mother was Eglah.
1CH 3:4 These six were born to David in Hebron, where he ruled for seven years and six months. He ruled thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
1CH 3:5 These were the sons born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon – the mother of these four was Bathsheba the daughter of Ammiel.
1CH 3:6 The other nine were Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet,
1CH 3:7 Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia,
1CH 3:8 Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.
1CH 3:9 These were all the sons of David, not counting the sons of his concubines. Tamar was their sister.
1CH 3:10 Solomon’s son was Rehoboam, followed by Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
1CH 3:11 Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
1CH 3:12 Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
1CH 3:13 Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
1CH 3:14 Amon his son, Josiah his son.
1CH 3:15 The sons of Josiah: Johanan was the firstborn; Jehoiakim was born second; Zedekiah third; and Shallum fourth.
1CH 3:16 The sons of Jehoiakim: his son Jehoiachin and his son Zedekiah.
1CH 3:17 The sons of Jehoiachin the exile: Shealtiel his son,
1CH 3:18 Malkiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
1CH 3:19 The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei. The sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah. Shelomith was their sister.
1CH 3:20 The five others were Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and Jushab-Hesed.
1CH 3:21 The descendants of Hananiah: Pelatiah, Jeshaiah, the sons of Rephaiah, of Arnan, of Obadiah, and of Shecaniah.
1CH 3:22 The descendants of Shecaniah: Shemaiah and his sons: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat – six in all.
1CH 3:23 The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam – three in all.
1CH 3:24 The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani – seven in all.
1CH 4:1 The descendants of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal.
1CH 4:2 Reaiah the son of Shobal was the father of Jahath, and Jahath was the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These were the clans of the Zorathites.
1CH 4:3 These were the sons of Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash. Their sister was Hazzelelponi.
1CH 4:4 Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Ezer was the father of Hushah. These were the descendants of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah and the father of Bethlehem.
1CH 4:5 Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
1CH 4:6 Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, Hepher, Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
1CH 4:7 The sons of Helah: Zereth, Zohar, Ethnan,
1CH 4:8 and Koz, who was the father of Anub, Hazzobebah, and the clans of Aharhel the son of Harum.
1CH 4:9 Jabez was more respected than his brothers. His mother had named him Jabez, for she said, “I experienced pain when I gave birth to him.”
1CH 4:10 Jabez called out to the God of Israel, “If only you would greatly bless me and expand my territory! May your hand be with me! Keep me from harm so I might not endure pain!” God answered his prayer.
1CH 4:11 Kelub, the brother of Shuhah, was the father of Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
1CH 4:12 Eshton was the father of Beth-Rapha, Paseah, and Tehinnah, the father of Ir Nahash. These were the men of Recah.
1CH 4:13 The sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah. The sons of Othniel: Hathath and Meonothai.
1CH 4:14 Meonothai was the father of Ophrah. Seraiah was the father of Joab, the father of those who live in Ge Harashim, who were craftsmen.
1CH 4:15 The sons of Caleb son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam. The son of Elah: Kenaz.
1CH 4:16 The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.
1CH 4:17 The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered, Epher, and Jalon. Mered’s wife Bithiah gave birth to Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah, the father of Eshtemoa.
1CH 4:18 (His Judahite wife gave birth to Jered the father of Gedor, Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah.) These were the sons of Pharaoh’s daughter Bithiah, whom Mered married.
1CH 4:19 The sons of Hodiah’s wife, the sister of Naham: the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
1CH 4:20 The sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Ben-Hanan, and Tilon. The descendants of Ishi: Zoheth and Ben Zoheth.
1CH 4:21 The sons of Shelah son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, Laadah the father of Mareshah, the clans of the linen workers at Beth-Ashbea,
1CH 4:22 Jokim, the men of Cozeba, and Joash and Saraph, both of whom ruled in Moab and Jashubi Lehem. (This information is from ancient records.)
1CH 4:23 They were the potters who lived in Netaim and Gederah; they lived there and worked for the king.
1CH 4:24 The descendants of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul,
1CH 4:25 his son Shallum, his son Mibsam, and his son Mishma.
1CH 4:26 The descendants of Mishma: His son Hammuel, his son Zaccur, and his son Shimei.
1CH 4:27 Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters. But his brothers did not have many sons, so their whole clan was not as numerous as the sons of Judah.
1CH 4:28 They lived in Beer Sheba, Moladah, Hazar Shual,
1CH 4:29 Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad,
1CH 4:30 Bethuel, Hormah, Ziklag,
1CH 4:31 Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susim, Beth Biri, and Shaaraim. These were their towns until the reign of David.
1CH 4:32 Their settlements also included Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan – five towns.
1CH 4:33 They also lived in all the settlements that surrounded these towns as far as Baal. These were their settlements; they kept genealogical records.
1CH 4:34 Their clan leaders were: Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah son of Amaziah,
1CH 4:35 Joel, Jehu son of Joshibiah (son of Seraiah, son of Asiel),
1CH 4:36 Eleoenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah,
1CH 4:37 Ziza son of Shipi (son of Allon, son of Jedaiah, son of Shimri, son of Shemaiah).
1CH 4:38 These who are named above were the leaders of their clans. Their extended families increased greatly in numbers.
1CH 4:39 They went to the entrance of Gedor, to the east of the valley, looking for pasture for their sheep.
1CH 4:40 They found fertile and rich pasture; the land was very broad, undisturbed and peaceful. Indeed some Hamites had been living there prior to that.
1CH 4:41 The men whose names are listed came during the time of King Hezekiah of Judah and attacked the Hamites’ settlements, as well as the Meunites they discovered there, and they wiped them out to this very day. They dispossessed them, for they found pasture for their sheep there.
1CH 4:42 Five hundred men of Simeon, led by Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, went to the hill country of Seir
1CH 4:43 and defeated the rest of the Amalekite refugees; they live there to this very day.
1CH 5:1 The sons of Reuben, Israel’s firstborn – (Now he was the firstborn, but when he defiled his father’s bed, his rights as firstborn were given to the sons of Joseph, Israel’s son. So Reuben is not listed as firstborn in the genealogical records.
1CH 5:2 Though Judah was the strongest among his brothers and a leader descended from him, the right of the firstborn belonged to Joseph.)
1CH 5:3 The sons of Reuben, Israel’s firstborn: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
1CH 5:4 The descendants of Joel: His son Shemaiah, his son Gog, his son Shimei,
1CH 5:5 his son Micah, his son Reaiah, his son Baal,
1CH 5:6 and his son Beerah, whom King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria carried into exile. Beerah was the tribal leader of Reuben.
1CH 5:7 His brothers by their clans, as listed in their genealogical records: The leader Jeiel, Zechariah,
1CH 5:8 and Bela son of Azaz, son of Shema, son of Joel. They lived in Aroer as far as Nebo and Baal Meon.
1CH 5:9 In the east they settled as far as the entrance to the desert that stretches to the Euphrates River, for their cattle had increased in numbers in the land of Gilead.
1CH 5:10 During the time of Saul they attacked the Hagrites and defeated them. They took over their territory in the entire eastern region of Gilead.
1CH 5:11 The descendants of Gad lived near them in the land of Bashan, as far as Salecah.
1CH 5:12 They included Joel the leader, Shapham the second in command, Janai, and Shaphat in Bashan.
1CH 5:13 Their relatives, listed according to their families, included Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber – seven in all.
1CH 5:14 These were the sons of Abihail son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of Michael, son of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz.
1CH 5:15 Ahi son of Abdiel, son of Guni, was the leader of the family.
1CH 5:16 They lived in Gilead, in Bashan and its surrounding settlements, and in the pasturelands of Sharon to their very borders.
1CH 5:17 All of them were listed in the genealogical records in the time of King Jotham of Judah and in the time of King Jeroboam of Israel.
1CH 5:18 The Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had 44,760 men in their combined armies, warriors who carried shields and swords, were equipped with bows, and were trained for war.
1CH 5:19 They attacked the Hagrites, Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab.
1CH 5:20 They received divine help in fighting them, and the Hagrites and all their allies were handed over to them. They cried out to God during the battle; he responded to their prayers because they trusted in him.
1CH 5:21 They seized the Hagrites’ animals, including 50,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys. They also took captive 100,000 people.
1CH 5:22 Because God fought for them, they killed many of the enemy. They dispossessed the Hagrites and lived in their land until the exile.
1CH 5:23 The half-tribe of Manasseh settled in the land from Bashan as far as Baal Hermon, Senir, and Mount Hermon. They grew in number.
1CH 5:24 These were the leaders of their families: Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel. They were skilled warriors, men of reputation, and leaders of their families.
1CH 5:25 But they were unfaithful to the God of their ancestors and worshiped instead the gods of the native peoples whom God had destroyed before them.
1CH 5:26 So the God of Israel stirred up King Pul of Assyria (that is, King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria), and he carried away the Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh and took them to Halah, Habor, Hara, and the river of Gozan, where they remain to this very day.
1CH 6:1 The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
1CH 6:2 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
1CH 6:3 The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
1CH 6:4 Eleazar was the father of Phinehas, and Phinehas was the father of Abishua.
1CH 6:5 Abishua was the father of Bukki, and Bukki was the father of Uzzi.
1CH 6:6 Uzzi was the father of Zerahiah, and Zerahiah was the father of Meraioth.
1CH 6:7 Meraioth was the father of Amariah, and Amariah was the father of Ahitub.
1CH 6:8 Ahitub was the father of Zadok, and Zadok was the father of Ahimaaz.
1CH 6:9 Ahimaaz was the father of Azariah, and Azariah was the father of Johanan.
1CH 6:10 Johanan was the father of Azariah, who served as a priest in the temple Solomon built in Jerusalem.
1CH 6:11 Azariah was the father of Amariah, and Amariah was the father of Ahitub.
1CH 6:12 Ahitub was the father of Zadok, and Zadok was the father of Shallum.
1CH 6:13 Shallum was the father of Hilkiah, and Hilkiah was the father of Azariah.
1CH 6:14 Azariah was the father of Seraiah, and Seraiah was the father of Jehozadak.
1CH 6:15 Jehozadak went into exile when the Lord sent the people of Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
1CH 6:16 The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
1CH 6:17 These are the names of the sons Gershom: Libni and Shimei.
1CH 6:18 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
1CH 6:19 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites by their families.
1CH 6:20 To Gershom: His son Libni, his son Jahath, his son Zimmah,
1CH 6:21 his son Joah, his son Iddo, his son Zerah, and his son Jeatherai.
1CH 6:22 The sons of Kohath: His son Amminadab, his son Korah, his son Assir,
1CH 6:23 his son Elkanah, his son Ebiasaph, his son Assir,
1CH 6:24 his son Tahath, his son Uriel, his son Uzziah, and his son Shaul.
1CH 6:25 The sons of Elkanah: Amasai, Ahimoth,
1CH 6:26 his son Elkanah, his son Zophai, his son Nahath,
1CH 6:27 his son Eliab, his son Jeroham, and his son Elkanah.
1CH 6:28 The sons of Samuel: Joel the firstborn and Abijah the second oldest.
1CH 6:29 The descendants of Merari: Mahli, his son Libni, his son Shimei, his son Uzzah,
1CH 6:30 his son Shimea, his son Haggiah, and his son Asaiah.
1CH 6:31 These are the men David put in charge of music in the Lord’s sanctuary, after the ark was placed there.
1CH 6:32 They performed music before the sanctuary of the meeting tent until Solomon built the Lord’s temple in Jerusalem. They carried out their tasks according to regulations.
1CH 6:33 These are the ones who served along with their sons: From the Kohathites: Heman the musician, son of Joel, son of Samuel,
1CH 6:34 son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of Toah,
1CH 6:35 son of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasai,
1CH 6:36 son of Elkanah, son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah,
1CH 6:37 son of Tahath, son of Assir, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah,
1CH 6:38 son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, son of Israel.
1CH 6:39 Serving beside him was his fellow Levite Asaph, son of Berechiah, son of Shimea,
1CH 6:40 son of Michael, son of Baaseiah, son of Malkijah,
1CH 6:41 son of Ethni, son of Zerah, son of Adaiah,
1CH 6:42 son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei,
1CH 6:43 son of Jahath, son of Gershom, son of Levi.
1CH 6:44 Serving beside them were their fellow Levites, the descendants of Merari, led by Ethan, son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of Malluch,
1CH 6:45 son of Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah,
1CH 6:46 son of Amzi, son of Bani, son of Shemer,
1CH 6:47 son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of Levi.
1CH 6:48 The rest of their fellow Levites were assigned to perform the remaining tasks at God’s sanctuary.
1CH 6:49 But Aaron and his descendants offered sacrifices on the altar for burnt offerings and on the altar for incense as they had been assigned to do in the most holy sanctuary. They made atonement for Israel, just as God’s servant Moses had ordered.
1CH 6:50 These were the descendants of Aaron: His son Eleazar, his son Phinehas, his son Abishua,
1CH 6:51 his son Bukki, his son Uzzi, his son Zerahiah,
1CH 6:52 his son Meraioth, his son Amariah, his son Ahitub,
1CH 6:53 his son Zadok, and his son Ahimaaz.
1CH 6:54 These were the areas where Aaron’s descendants lived: The following belonged to the Kohathite clan, for they received the first allotment:
1CH 6:55 They were allotted Hebron in the territory of Judah, as well as its surrounding pasturelands.
1CH 6:56 (But the city’s land and nearby towns were allotted to Caleb son of Jephunneh.)
1CH 6:57 The descendants of Aaron were also allotted as cities of refuge Hebron, Libnah and its pasturelands, Jattir, Eshtemoa and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:58 Hilez and its pasturelands, Debir and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:59 Ashan and its pasturelands, and Beth Shemesh and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:60 Within the territory of the tribe of Benjamin they were allotted Geba and its pasturelands, Alemeth and its pasturelands, and Anathoth and its pasturelands. Their clans were allotted thirteen cities in all.
1CH 6:61 The rest of Kohath’s descendants were allotted ten cities in the territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh.
1CH 6:62 The clans of Gershom’s descendants received thirteen cities within the territory of the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and Manasseh (in Bashan).
1CH 6:63 The clans of Merari’s descendants were allotted twelve cities within the territory of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.
1CH 6:64 So the Israelites gave to the Levites these cities and their pasturelands.
1CH 6:65 They allotted these previously named cities from the territory of the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.
1CH 6:66 The clans of Kohath’s descendants also received territory within the tribe of Ephraim.
1CH 6:67 They were allotted as cities of refuge Shechem and its pasturelands (in the hill country of Ephraim), Gezer and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:68 Jokmeam and its pasturelands, Beth Horon and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:69 Aijalon and its pasturelands, and Gath Rimmon and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:70 Within the territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh, the rest of Kohath’s descendants received Aner and its pasturelands and Bileam and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:71 The following belonged to Gershom’s descendants: Within the territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan and its pasturelands and Ashtaroth and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:72 Within the territory of the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh and its pasturelands, Daberath and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:73 Ramoth and its pasturelands, and Anem and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:74 Within the territory of the tribe of Asher: Mashal and its pasturelands, Abdon and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:75 Hukok and its pasturelands, and Rehob and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:76 Within the territory of the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee and its pasturelands, Hammon and its pasturelands, and Kiriathaim and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:77 The following belonged to the rest of Merari’s descendants: Within the territory of the tribe of Zebulun: Rimmono and its pasturelands, and Tabor and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:78 Within the territory of the tribe of Reuben across the Jordan River east of Jericho: Bezer in the desert and its pasturelands, Jahzah and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:79 Kedemoth and its pasturelands, and Mephaath and its pasturelands.
1CH 6:80 Within the territory of the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead and its pasturelands, Mahanaim and its pasturelands,
1CH 6:81 Heshbon and its pasturelands, and Jazer and its pasturelands.
1CH 7:1 The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron – four in all.
1CH 7:2 The sons of Tola: Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Jibsam, and Samuel. They were leaders of their families. In the time of David there were 22,600 warriors listed in Tola’s genealogical records.
1CH 7:3 The son of Uzzi: Izrachiah. The sons of Izrahiah: Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah. All five were leaders.
1CH 7:4 According to the genealogical records of their families, they had 36,000 warriors available for battle, for they had numerous wives and sons.
1CH 7:5 Altogether the genealogical records of the clans of Issachar listed 87,000 warriors.
1CH 7:6 The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Beker, and Jediael – three in all.
1CH 7:7 The sons of Bela: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri. The five of them were leaders of their families. There were 22,034 warriors listed in their genealogical records.
1CH 7:8 The sons of Beker: Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth, Abijah, Anathoth, and Alameth. All these were the sons of Beker.
1CH 7:9 There were 20,200 family leaders and warriors listed in their genealogical records.
1CH 7:10 The son of Jediael: Bilhan. The sons of Bilhan: Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Kenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and Ahishahar.
1CH 7:11 All these were the sons of Jediael. Listed in their genealogical records were 17,200 family leaders and warriors who were capable of marching out to battle.
1CH 7:12 The Shuppites and Huppites were descendants of Ir; the Hushites were descendants of Aher.
1CH 7:13 The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shallum – sons of Bilhah.
1CH 7:14 The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, who was born to Manasseh’s Aramean concubine. She also gave birth to Makir the father of Gilead.
1CH 7:15 Now Makir married a wife from the Huppites and Shuppites. (His sister’s name was Maacah.) Zelophehad was Manasseh’s second son; he had only daughters.
1CH 7:16 Maacah, Makir’s wife, gave birth to a son, whom she named Peresh. His brother was Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Rekem.
1CH 7:17 The son of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, son of Makir, son of Manasseh.
1CH 7:18 His sister Hammoleketh gave birth to Ishhod, Abiezer, and Mahlah.
1CH 7:19 The sons of Shemida were Ahian, Shechem, Likhi, and Aniam.
1CH 7:20 The descendants of Ephraim: Shuthelah, his son Bered, his son Tahath, his son Eleadah, his son Tahath,
1CH 7:21 his son Zabad, his son Shuthelah (Ezer and Elead were killed by the men of Gath, who were natives of the land, when they went down to steal their cattle.
1CH 7:22 Their father Ephraim mourned for them many days and his brothers came to console him.
1CH 7:23 He had sexual relations with his wife; she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Ephraim named him Beriah because tragedy had come to his family.
1CH 7:24 His daughter was Sheerah, who built Lower and Upper Beth Horon, as well as Uzzen Sheerah),
1CH 7:25 his son Rephah, his son Resheph, his son Telah, his son Tahan,
1CH 7:26 his son Ladan, his son Ammihud, his son Elishama,
1CH 7:27 his son Nun, and his son Joshua.
1CH 7:28 Their property and settlements included Bethel and its surrounding towns, Naaran to the east, Gezer and its surrounding towns to the west, and Shechem and its surrounding towns as far as Ayyah and its surrounding towns.
1CH 7:29 On the border of Manasseh’s territory were Beth-Shean and its surrounding towns, Taanach and its surrounding towns, Megiddo and its surrounding towns, and Dor and its surrounding towns. The descendants of Joseph, Israel’s son, lived here.
1CH 7:30 The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, and Beriah. Serah was their sister.
1CH 7:31 The sons of Beriah: Heber and Malkiel, who was the father of Birzaith.
1CH 7:32 Heber was the father of Japhlet, Shomer, Hotham, and Shua their sister.
1CH 7:33 The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, Bimhal, and Ashvath. These were Japhlet’s sons.
1CH 7:34 The sons of his brother Shemer: Rohgah, Hubbah, and Aram.
1CH 7:35 The sons of his brother Helem: Zophah, Imna, Shelesh, and Amal.
1CH 7:36 The sons of Zophah: Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah,
1CH 7:37 Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera.
1CH 7:38 The sons of Jether: Jephunneh, Pispah, and Ara.
1CH 7:39 The sons of Ulla: Arah, Hanniel, and Rizia.
1CH 7:40 All these were the descendants of Asher. They were the leaders of their families, the most capable men, who were warriors and served as head chiefs. There were 26,000 warriors listed in their genealogical records as capable of doing battle.
1CH 8:1 Benjamin was the father of Bela, his firstborn; Ashbel was born second, Aharah third,
1CH 8:2 Nohah fourth, and Rapha fifth.
1CH 8:3 Bela’s sons were Addar, Gera, Abihud,
1CH 8:4 Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah,
1CH 8:5 Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram.
1CH 8:6 These were the descendants of Ehud who were leaders of the families living in Geba who were forced to move to Manahath:
1CH 8:7 Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera, who moved them. Gera was the father of Uzzah and Ahihud.
1CH 8:8 Shaharaim fathered sons in Moab after he divorced his wives Hushim and Baara.
1CH 8:9 By his wife Hodesh he fathered Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malkam,
1CH 8:10 Jeuz, Sakia, and Mirmah. These were his sons; they were family leaders.
1CH 8:11 By Hushim he fathered Abitub and Elpaal.
1CH 8:12 The sons of Elpaal: Eber, Misham, Shemed (who built Ono and Lod, as well as its surrounding towns),
1CH 8:13 Beriah, and Shema. They were leaders of the families living in Aijalon and chased out the inhabitants of Gath.
1CH 8:14 Ahio, Shashak, Jeremoth,
1CH 8:15 Zebadiah, Arad, Eder,
1CH 8:16 Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah.
1CH 8:17 Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber,
1CH 8:18 Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal.
1CH 8:19 Jakim, Zikri, Zabdi,
1CH 8:20 Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel,
1CH 8:21 Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei.
1CH 8:22 Ishpan, Eber, Eliel,
1CH 8:23 Abdon, Zikri, Hanan,
1CH 8:24 Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah,
1CH 8:25 Iphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak.
1CH 8:26 Shamsherai, Shechariah, Athaliah,
1CH 8:27 Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zikri were the sons of Jeroham.
1CH 8:28 These were the family leaders listed in the genealogical records; they lived in Jerusalem.
1CH 8:29 The father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon; his wife’s name was Maacah.
1CH 8:30 His firstborn son was Abdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baal, Nadab,
1CH 8:31 Gedor, Ahio, Zeker, and Mikloth.
1CH 8:32 Mikloth was the father of Shimeah. They also lived near their relatives in Jerusalem.
1CH 8:33 Ner was the father of Kish, and Kish was the father of Saul. Saul was the father of Jonathan, Malki-Shua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
1CH 8:34 The son of Jonathan: Meribbaal. Meribbaal was the father of Micah.
1CH 8:35 The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz.
1CH 8:36 Ahaz was the father of Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri was the father of Moza,
1CH 8:37 and Moza was the father of Binea. His son was Raphah, whose son was Eleasah, whose son was Azel.
1CH 8:38 Azel had six sons: Azrikam his firstborn, followed by Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
1CH 8:39 The sons of his brother Eshek: Ulam was his firstborn, Jeush second, and Eliphelet third.
1CH 8:40 The sons of Ulam were warriors who were adept archers. They had many sons and grandsons, a total of 150. All these were the descendants of Benjamin.
1CH 9:1 Genealogical records were kept for all Israel; they are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Israel. The people of Judah were carried away to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness.
1CH 9:2 The first to resettle on their property and in their cities were some Israelites, priests, Levites, and temple servants.
1CH 9:3 Some from the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim and Manasseh settled in Jerusalem.
1CH 9:4 The settlers included: Uthai son of Ammihud, son of Omri, son of Imri, son of Bani, who was a descendant of Perez son of Judah.
1CH 9:5 From the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn and his sons.
1CH 9:6 From the descendants of Zerah: Jeuel. Their relatives numbered 690.
1CH 9:7 From the descendants of Benjamin: Sallu son of Meshullam, son of Hodaviah, son of Hassenuah;
1CH 9:8 Ibneiah son of Jeroham; Elah son of Uzzi, son of Mikri; and Meshullam son of Shephatiah, son of Reuel, son of Ibnijah.
1CH 9:9 Their relatives, listed in their genealogical records, numbered 956. All these men were leaders of their families.
1CH 9:10 From the priests: Jedaiah; Jehoiarib; Jakin;
1CH 9:11 Azariah son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub the leader in God’s temple;
1CH 9:12 Adaiah son of Jeroham, son of Pashhur, son of Malkijah; and Maasai son of Adiel, son of Jahzerah, son of Meshullam, son of Meshillemith, son of Immer.
1CH 9:13 Their relatives, who were leaders of their families, numbered 1,760. They were capable men who were assigned to carry out the various tasks of service in God’s temple.
1CH 9:14 From the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hasshub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah a descendant of Merari;
1CH 9:15 Bakbakkar; Heresh; Galal; Mattaniah son of Mika, son of Zikri, son of Asaph;
1CH 9:16 Obadiah son of Shemaiah, son of Galal, son of Jeduthun; and Berechiah son of Asa, son of Elkanah, who lived among the settlements of the Netophathites.
1CH 9:17 The gatekeepers were: Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman, and their brothers. Shallum was the leader;
1CH 9:18 he serves to this day at the King’s Gate on the east. These were the gatekeepers from the camp of the descendants of Levi.
1CH 9:19 Shallum son of Kore, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, and his relatives from his family (the Korahites) were assigned to guard the entrance to the sanctuary. Their ancestors had guarded the entrance to the Lord’s dwelling place.
1CH 9:20 Phinehas son of Eleazar had been their leader in earlier times, and the Lord was with him.
1CH 9:21 Zechariah son of Meshelemiah was the guard at the entrance to the meeting tent.
1CH 9:22 All those selected to be gatekeepers at the entrances numbered 212. Their names were recorded in the genealogical records of their settlements. David and Samuel the prophet had appointed them to their positions.
1CH 9:23 They and their descendants were assigned to guard the gates of the Lord’s sanctuary (that is, the tabernacle).
1CH 9:24 The gatekeepers were posted on all four sides – east, west, north, and south.
1CH 9:25 Their relatives, who lived in their settlements, came from time to time and served with them for seven-day periods.
1CH 9:26 The four head gatekeepers, who were Levites, were assigned to guard the storerooms and treasuries in God’s sanctuary.
1CH 9:27 They would spend the night in their posts all around God’s sanctuary, for they were assigned to guard it and would open it with the key every morning.
1CH 9:28 Some of them were in charge of the articles used by those who served; they counted them when they brought them in and when they brought them out.
1CH 9:29 Some of them were in charge of the equipment and articles of the sanctuary, as well as the flour, wine, olive oil, incense, and spices.
1CH 9:30 (But some of the priests mixed the spices.)
1CH 9:31 Mattithiah, a Levite, the firstborn son of Shallum the Korahite, was in charge of baking the bread for offerings.
1CH 9:32 Some of the Kohathites, their relatives, were in charge of preparing the bread that is displayed each Sabbath.
1CH 9:33 The musicians and Levite family leaders stayed in rooms at the sanctuary and were exempt from other duties, for day and night they had to carry out their assigned tasks.
1CH 9:34 These were the family leaders of the Levites, as listed in their genealogical records. They lived in Jerusalem.
1CH 9:35 Jeiel (the father of Gibeon) lived in Gibeon. His wife was Maacah.
1CH 9:36 His firstborn son was Abdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab,
1CH 9:37 Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth.
1CH 9:38 Mikloth was the father of Shimeam. They also lived near their relatives in Jerusalem.
1CH 9:39 Ner was the father of Kish, and Kish was the father of Saul. Saul was the father of Jonathan, Malki-Shua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
1CH 9:40 The son of Jonathan: Meribbaal, who was the father of Micah.
1CH 9:41 The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tahrea, and Ahaz.
1CH 9:42 Ahaz was the father of Jarah, and Jarah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri was the father of Moza,
1CH 9:43 and Moza was the father of Binea. His son was Rephaiah, whose son was Eleasah, whose son was Azel.
1CH 9:44 Azel had six sons: Azrikam his firstborn, followed by Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. These were the sons of Azel.
1CH 10:1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel. The Israelites fled before the Philistines and many of them fell dead on Mount Gilboa.
1CH 10:2 The Philistines stayed right on the heels of Saul and his sons. They struck down Saul’s sons Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malki-Shua.
1CH 10:3 The battle was thick around Saul; the archers spotted him and wounded him.
1CH 10:4 Saul told his armor bearer, “Draw your sword and stab me with it. Otherwise these uncircumcised people will come and torture me.” But his armor bearer refused to do it, because he was very afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it.
1CH 10:5 When his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword and died.
1CH 10:6 So Saul and his three sons died; his whole household died together.
1CH 10:7 When all the Israelites who were in the valley saw that the army had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their cities and fled. The Philistines came and occupied them.
1CH 10:8 The next day, when the Philistines came to strip loot from the corpses, they discovered Saul and his sons lying dead on Mount Gilboa.
1CH 10:9 They stripped his corpse, and then carried off his head and his armor. They sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines proclaiming the news to their idols and their people.
1CH 10:10 They placed his armor in the temple of their gods and hung his head in the temple of Dagon.
1CH 10:11 When all the residents of Jabesh Gilead heard about everything the Philistines had done to Saul,
1CH 10:12 all the warriors went and recovered the bodies of Saul and his sons and brought them to Jabesh. They buried their remains under the oak tree in Jabesh and fasted for seven days.
1CH 10:13 So Saul died because he was unfaithful to the Lord and did not obey the Lord’s instructions; he even tried to conjure up underworld spirits.
1CH 10:14 He did not seek the Lord’s guidance, so the Lord killed him and transferred the kingdom to David son of Jesse.
1CH 11:1 All Israel joined David at Hebron and said, “Look, we are your very flesh and blood!
1CH 11:2 In the past, even when Saul was king, you were Israel’s commanding general. The Lord your God said to you, ‘You will shepherd my people Israel; you will rule over my people Israel.’”
1CH 11:3 When all the leaders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, David made an agreement with them in Hebron before the Lord. They anointed David king over Israel, just as the Lord had announced through Samuel.
1CH 11:4 David and the whole Israelite army advanced to Jerusalem (that is, Jebus). (The Jebusites, the land’s original inhabitants, lived there.)
1CH 11:5 The residents of Jebus said to David, “You cannot invade this place!” But David captured the fortress of Zion (that is, the City of David).
1CH 11:6 David said, “Whoever attacks the Jebusites first will become commanding general!” So Joab son of Zeruiah attacked first and became commander.
1CH 11:7 David lived in the fortress; for this reason it is called the City of David.
1CH 11:8 He built up the city around it, from the terrace to the surrounding walls; Joab restored the rest of the city.
1CH 11:9 David’s power steadily grew, for the Lord who commands armies was with him.
1CH 11:10 These were the leaders of David’s warriors who helped establish and stabilize his rule over all Israel, in accordance with the Lord’s word.
1CH 11:11 This is the list of David’s warriors: Jashobeam, a Hacmonite, was head of the officers. He killed three hundred men with his spear in a single battle.
1CH 11:12 Next in command was Eleazar son of Dodo the Ahohite. He was one of the three elite warriors.
1CH 11:13 He was with David in Pas Dammim when the Philistines assembled there for battle. In an area of the field that was full of barley, the army retreated before the Philistines,
1CH 11:14 but then they made a stand in the middle of that area. They defended it and defeated the Philistines; the Lord gave them a great victory.
1CH 11:15 Three of the thirty leaders went down to David at the rocky cliff at the cave of Adullam, while a Philistine force was camped in the Valley of Rephaim.
1CH 11:16 David was in the stronghold at the time, while a Philistine garrison was in Bethlehem.
1CH 11:17 David was thirsty and said, “How I wish someone would give me some water to drink from the cistern in Bethlehem near the city gate!”
1CH 11:18 So the three elite warriors broke through the Philistine forces and drew some water from the cistern in Bethlehem near the city gate. They carried it back to David, but David refused to drink it. He poured it out as a drink offering to the Lord
1CH 11:19 and said, “God forbid that I should do this! Should I drink the blood of these men who risked their lives?” Because they risked their lives to bring it to him, he refused to drink it. Such were the exploits of the three elite warriors.
1CH 11:20 Abishai the brother of Joab was head of the three elite warriors. He killed three hundred men with his spear and gained fame along with the three elite warriors.
1CH 11:21 From the three he was given double honor and he became their officer, even though he was not one of them.
1CH 11:22 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a brave warrior from Kabzeel who performed great exploits. He struck down the two sons of Ariel of Moab; he also went down and killed a lion inside a cistern on a snowy day.
1CH 11:23 He even killed an Egyptian who was seven and a half feet tall. The Egyptian had a spear as big as the crossbeam of a weaver’s loom; Benaiah attacked him with a club. He grabbed the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear.
1CH 11:24 Such were the exploits of Benaiah son of Jehoiada, who gained fame along with the three elite warriors.
1CH 11:25 He received honor from the thirty warriors, though he was not one of the three elite warriors. David put him in charge of his bodyguard.
1CH 11:26 The mighty warriors were: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo, from Bethlehem,
1CH 11:27 Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
1CH 11:28 Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,
1CH 11:29 Sibbekai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
1CH 11:30 Maharai the Netophathite, Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite,
1CH 11:31 Ithai son of Ribai from Gibeah in Benjaminite territory, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
1CH 11:32 Hurai from the valleys of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
1CH 11:33 Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
1CH 11:34 the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan son of Shageh the Hararite,
1CH 11:35 Ahiam son of Sakar the Hararite, Eliphal son of Ur,
1CH 11:36 Hepher the Mekerathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
1CH 11:37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai son of Ezbai,
1CH 11:38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar son of Hagri,
1CH 11:39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the armor-bearer of Joab son of Zeruiah,
1CH 11:40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
1CH 11:41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad son of Achli,
1CH 11:42 Adina son of Shiza the Reubenite, leader of the Reubenites and the thirty warriors with him,
1CH 11:43 Hanan son of Maacah, Joshaphat the Mithnite,
1CH 11:44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel, the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
1CH 11:45 Jediael son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,
1CH 11:46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
1CH 11:47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.
1CH 12:1 These were the men who joined David in Ziklag, when he was banished from the presence of Saul son of Kish. (They were among the warriors who assisted him in battle.
1CH 12:2 They were armed with bows and could shoot arrows or sling stones right or left-handed. They were fellow tribesmen of Saul from Benjamin. ) These were:
1CH 12:3 Ahiezer, the leader, and Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; Jeziel and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; Berachah, Jehu the Anathothite,
1CH 12:4 Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, one of the thirty warriors and their leader, Jeremiah, Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad the Gederathite,
1CH 12:5 Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah, Shemariah, Shephatiah the Haruphite,
1CH 12:6 Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, who were Korahites,
1CH 12:7 and Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham from Gedor.
1CH 12:8 Some of the Gadites joined David at the stronghold in the desert. They were warriors who were trained for battle; they carried shields and spears. They were as fierce as lions and could run as quickly as gazelles across the hills.
1CH 12:9 Ezer was the leader, Obadiah the second in command, Eliab the third,
1CH 12:10 Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
1CH 12:11 Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
1CH 12:12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
1CH 12:13 Jeremiah the tenth, and Machbannai the eleventh.
1CH 12:14 These Gadites were military leaders; the least led a hundred men, the greatest a thousand.
1CH 12:15 They crossed the Jordan River in the first month, when it was overflowing its banks, and routed those living in all the valleys to the east and west.
1CH 12:16 Some from Benjamin and Judah also came to David’s stronghold.
1CH 12:17 David went out to meet them and said, “If you come to me in peace and want to help me, then I will make an alliance with you. But if you come to betray me to my enemies when I have not harmed you, may the God of our ancestors take notice and judge!”
1CH 12:18 But a spirit empowered Amasai, the leader of the thirty warriors, and he said: “We are yours, O David! We support you, O son of Jesse! May you greatly prosper! May those who help you prosper! Indeed your God helps you!” So David accepted them and made them leaders of raiding bands.
1CH 12:19 Some men from Manasseh joined David when he went with the Philistines to fight against Saul. (But in the end they did not help the Philistines because, after taking counsel, the Philistine lords sent David away, saying: “It would be disastrous for us if he deserts to his master Saul.”)
1CH 12:20 When David went to Ziklag, the men of Manasseh who joined him were Adnach, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, leaders of a thousand soldiers each in the tribe of Manasseh.
1CH 12:21 They helped David fight against raiding bands, for all of them were warriors and leaders in the army.
1CH 12:22 Each day men came to help David until his army became very large.
1CH 12:23 The following is a record of the armed warriors who came with their leaders and joined David in Hebron in order to make David king in Saul’s place, in accordance with the Lord’s decree:
1CH 12:24 From Judah came 6,800 trained warriors carrying shields and spears.
1CH 12:25 From Simeon there were 7,100 warriors.
1CH 12:26 From Levi there were 4,600.
1CH 12:27 Jehoiada, the leader of Aaron’s descendants, brought 3,700 men with him,
1CH 12:28 along with Zadok, a young warrior, and twenty-two leaders from his family.
1CH 12:29 From Benjamin, Saul’s tribe, there were 3,000, most of whom, up to that time, had been loyal to Saul.
1CH 12:30 From Ephraim there were 20,800 warriors, who had brought fame to their families.
1CH 12:31 From the half tribe of Manasseh there were 18,000 who had been designated by name to come and make David king.
1CH 12:32 From Issachar there were 200 leaders and all their relatives at their command – they understood the times and knew what Israel should do.
1CH 12:33 From Zebulun there were 50,000 warriors who were prepared for battle, equipped with all kinds of weapons, and ready to give their undivided loyalty.
1CH 12:34 From Naphtali there were 1,000 officers, along with 37,000 men carrying shields and spears.
1CH 12:35 From Dan there were 28,600 men prepared for battle.
1CH 12:36 From Asher there were 40,000 warriors prepared for battle.
1CH 12:37 From the other side of the Jordan, from Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, there were 120,000 men armed with all kinds of weapons.
1CH 12:38 All these men were warriors who were ready to march. They came to Hebron to make David king over all Israel by acclamation; all the rest of the Israelites also were in agreement that David should become king.
1CH 12:39 They spent three days feasting there with David, for their relatives had given them provisions.
1CH 12:40 Also their neighbors, from as far away as Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali, were bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules, and oxen. There were large supplies of flour, fig cakes, raisins, wine, olive oil, beef, and lamb, for Israel was celebrating.
1CH 13:1 David consulted with his military officers, including those who led groups of a thousand and those who led groups of a hundred.
1CH 13:2 David said to the whole Israelite assembly, “If you so desire and the Lord our God approves, let’s spread the word to our brothers who remain in all the regions of Israel, and to the priests and Levites in their cities, so they may join us.
1CH 13:3 Let’s move the ark of our God back here, for we did not seek his will throughout Saul’s reign.”
1CH 13:4 The whole assembly agreed to do this, for the proposal seemed right to all the people.
1CH 13:5 So David assembled all Israel from the Shihor River in Egypt to Lebo Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim.
1CH 13:6 David and all Israel went up to Baalah (that is, Kiriath Jearim) in Judah to bring up from there the ark of God the Lord, who sits enthroned between the cherubim – the ark that is called by his name.
1CH 13:7 They transported the ark on a new cart from the house of Abinadab; Uzzah and Ahio were guiding the cart,
1CH 13:8 while David and all Israel were energetically celebrating before God, singing and playing various stringed instruments, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.
1CH 13:9 When they arrived at the threshing floor of Kidon, Uzzah reached out his hand to take hold of the ark, because the oxen stumbled.
1CH 13:10 The Lord was so furious with Uzzah, he killed him, because he reached out his hand and touched the ark. He died right there before God.
1CH 13:11 David was angry because the Lord attacked Uzzah; so he called that place Perez Uzzah, which remains its name to this very day.
1CH 13:12 David was afraid of God that day and said, “How will I ever be able to bring the ark of God up here?”
1CH 13:13 So David did not move the ark to the City of David; he left it in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite.
1CH 13:14 The ark of God remained in Obed-Edom’s house for three months; the Lord blessed Obed-Edom’s family and everything that belonged to him.
1CH 14:1 King Hiram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar logs, stonemasons, and carpenters to build a palace for him.
1CH 14:2 David realized that the Lord had established him as king over Israel and that he had elevated his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.
1CH 14:3 In Jerusalem David married more wives and fathered more sons and daughters.
1CH 14:4 These are the names of children born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,
1CH 14:5 Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet,
1CH 14:6 Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia,
1CH 14:7 Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
1CH 14:8 When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king of all Israel, all the Philistines marched up to confront him. When David heard about it, he marched out against them.
1CH 14:9 Now the Philistines had come and raided the Valley of Rephaim.
1CH 14:10 David asked God, “Should I march up against the Philistines? Will you hand them over to me?” The Lord said to him, “March up! I will hand them over to you!”
1CH 14:11 So they marched against Baal Perazim and David defeated them there. David said, “Using me as his instrument, God has burst out against my enemies like water bursts out.” So that place is called Baal Perazim.
1CH 14:12 The Philistines left their idols there, so David ordered that they be burned.
1CH 14:13 The Philistines again raided the valley.
1CH 14:14 So David again asked God what he should do. This time God told him, “Don’t march up after them; circle around them and come against them in front of the trees.
1CH 14:15 When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the trees, then attack. For at that moment the Lord is going before you to strike down the army of the Philistines.”
1CH 14:16 David did just as God commanded him, and they struck down the Philistine army from Gibeon to Gezer.
1CH 14:17 So David became famous in all the lands; the Lord caused all the nations to fear him.
1CH 15:1 David constructed buildings in the City of David; he then prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it.
1CH 15:2 Then David said, “Only the Levites may carry the ark of God, for the Lord chose them to carry the ark of the Lord and to serve before him perpetually.
1CH 15:3 David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring the ark of the Lord up to the place he had prepared for it.
1CH 15:4 David gathered together the descendants of Aaron and the Levites:
1CH 15:5 From the descendants of Kohath: Uriel the leader and 120 of his relatives.
1CH 15:6 From the descendants of Merari: Asaiah the leader and 220 of his relatives.
1CH 15:7 From the descendants of Gershom: Joel the leader and 130 of his relatives.
1CH 15:8 From the descendants of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the leader and 200 of his relatives.
1CH 15:9 From the descendants of Hebron: Eliel the leader and 80 of his relatives.
1CH 15:10 From the descendants of Uzziel: Amminadab the leader and 112 of his relatives.
1CH 15:11 David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar, along with the Levites Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab.
1CH 15:12 He told them: “You are the leaders of the Levites’ families. You and your relatives must consecrate yourselves and bring the ark of the Lord God of Israel up to the place I have prepared for it.
1CH 15:13 The first time you did not carry it; that is why the Lord God attacked us, because we did not ask him about the proper way to carry it.”
1CH 15:14 The priests and Levites consecrated themselves so they could bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel.
1CH 15:15 The descendants of Levi carried the ark of God on their shoulders with poles, just as Moses had ordered according to the divine command.
1CH 15:16 David told the leaders of the Levites to appoint some of their relatives as musicians; they were to play various instruments, including stringed instruments and cymbals, and to sing loudly and joyfully.
1CH 15:17 So the Levites appointed Heman son of Joel; one of his relatives, Asaph son of Berechiah; one of the descendants of Merari, Ethan son of Kushaiah;
1CH 15:18 along with some of their relatives who were second in rank, including Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, the gatekeepers.
1CH 15:19 The musicians Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were to sound the bronze cymbals;
1CH 15:20 Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah were to play the harps according to the alamoth style;
1CH 15:21 Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, Jeiel, and Azaziah were to play the lyres according to the sheminith style, as led by the director;
1CH 15:22 Kenaniah, the leader of the Levites, was in charge of transport, for he was well-informed on this matter;
1CH 15:23 Berechiah and Elkanah were guardians of the ark;
1CH 15:24 Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer the priests were to blow the trumpets before the ark of God; Obed-Edom and Jehiel were also guardians of the ark.
1CH 15:25 So David, the leaders of Israel, and the commanders of units of a thousand went to bring up the ark of the Lord’s covenant from the house of Obed-Edom with celebration.
1CH 15:26 When God helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the Lord’s covenant, they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams.
1CH 15:27 David was wrapped in a linen robe, as were all the Levites carrying the ark, the musicians, and Kenaniah the supervisor of transport and the musicians; David also wore a linen ephod.
1CH 15:28 All Israel brought up the ark of the Lord’s covenant; they were shouting, blowing trumpets, sounding cymbals, and playing stringed instruments.
1CH 15:29 As the ark of the Lord’s covenant entered the City of David, Michal, Saul’s daughter, looked out the window. When she saw King David jumping and celebrating, she despised him.
1CH 16:1 They brought the ark of God and put it in the middle of the tent David had pitched for it. Then they offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings before God.
1CH 16:2 When David finished offering burnt sacrifices and peace offerings, he pronounced a blessing over the people in the Lord’s name.
1CH 16:3 He then handed out to each Israelite man and woman a loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake.
1CH 16:4 He appointed some of the Levites to serve before the ark of the Lord, to offer prayers, songs of thanks, and hymns to the Lord God of Israel.
1CH 16:5 Asaph was the leader and Zechariah second in command, followed by Jeiel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-Edom, and Jeiel. They were to play stringed instruments; Asaph was to sound the cymbals;
1CH 16:6 and the priests Benaiah and Jahaziel were to blow trumpets regularly before the ark of God’s covenant.
1CH 16:7 That day David first gave to Asaph and his colleagues this song of thanks to the Lord:
1CH 16:8 Give thanks to the Lord! Call on his name! Make known his accomplishments among the nations!
1CH 16:9 Sing to him! Make music to him! Tell about all his miraculous deeds!
1CH 16:10 Boast about his holy name! Let the hearts of those who seek the Lord rejoice!
1CH 16:11 Seek the Lord and the strength he gives! Seek his presence continually!
1CH 16:12 Recall the miraculous deeds he performed, his mighty acts and the judgments he decreed,
1CH 16:13 O children of Israel, God’s servant, you descendants of Jacob, God’s chosen ones!
1CH 16:14 He is the Lord our God; he carries out judgment throughout the earth.
1CH 16:15 Remember continually his covenantal decree, the promise he made to a thousand generations –
1CH 16:16 the promise he made to Abraham, the promise he made by oath to Isaac!
1CH 16:17 He gave it to Jacob as a decree, to Israel as a lasting promise,
1CH 16:18 saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan as the portion of your inheritance.”
1CH 16:19 When they were few in number, just a very few, and foreign residents within it,
1CH 16:20 they wandered from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another.
1CH 16:21 He let no one oppress them, he disciplined kings for their sake,
1CH 16:22 saying, “Don’t touch my anointed ones! Don’t harm my prophets!”
1CH 16:23 Sing to the Lord, all the earth! Announce every day how he delivers!
1CH 16:24 Tell the nations about his splendor, tell all the nations about his miraculous deeds!
1CH 16:25 For the Lord is great and certainly worthy of praise, he is more awesome than all gods.
1CH 16:26 For all the gods of the nations are worthless, but the Lord made the heavens.
1CH 16:27 Majestic splendor emanates from him, he is the source of strength and joy.
1CH 16:28 Ascribe to the Lord, O families of the nations, ascribe to the Lord splendor and strength!
1CH 16:29 Ascribe to the Lord the splendor he deserves! Bring an offering and enter his presence! Worship the Lord in holy attire!
1CH 16:30 Tremble before him, all the earth! The world is established, it cannot be moved.
1CH 16:31 Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be happy! Let the nations say, ‘The Lord reigns!’
1CH 16:32 Let the sea and everything in it shout! Let the fields and everything in them celebrate!
1CH 16:33 Then let the trees of the forest shout with joy before the Lord, for he comes to judge the earth!
1CH 16:34 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good and his loyal love endures.
1CH 16:35 Say this prayer: “Deliver us, O God who delivers us! Gather us! Rescue us from the nations! Then we will give thanks to your holy name, and boast about your praiseworthy deeds.”
1CH 16:36 May the Lord God of Israel be praised, in the future and forevermore. Then all the people said, “We agree! Praise the Lord!”
1CH 16:37 David left Asaph and his colleagues there before the ark of the Lord’s covenant to serve before the ark regularly and fulfill each day’s requirements,
1CH 16:38 including Obed-Edom and sixty-eight colleagues. Obed-Edom son of Jeduthun and Hosah were gatekeepers.
1CH 16:39 Zadok the priest and his fellow priests served before the Lord’s tabernacle at the worship center in Gibeon,
1CH 16:40 regularly offering burnt sacrifices to the Lord on the altar for burnt sacrifice, morning and evening, according to what is prescribed in the law of the Lord which he charged Israel to observe.
1CH 16:41 Joining them were Heman, Jeduthun, and the rest of those chosen and designated by name to give thanks to the Lord. (For his loyal love endures!)
1CH 16:42 Heman and Jeduthun were in charge of the music, including the trumpets, cymbals, and the other musical instruments used in praising God. The sons of Jeduthun guarded the entrance.
1CH 16:43 Then all the people returned to their homes, and David went to pronounce a blessing on his family.
1CH 17:1 When David had settled into his palace, he said to Nathan the prophet, “Look, I am living in a palace made from cedar, while the ark of the Lord’s covenant is under a tent.”
1CH 17:2 Nathan said to David, “You should do whatever you have in mind, for God is with you.”
1CH 17:3 That night God told Nathan the prophet,
1CH 17:4 “Go, tell my servant David: ‘This is what the Lord says: “You must not build me a house in which to live.
1CH 17:5 For I have not lived in a house from the time I brought Israel up from Egypt to the present day. I have lived in a tent that has been in various places.
1CH 17:6 Wherever I moved throughout Israel, I did not say to any of the leaders whom I appointed to care for my people Israel, ‘Why have you not built me a house made from cedar?’”’
1CH 17:7 “So now, say this to my servant David: ‘This is what the Lord who commands armies says: “I took you from the pasture and from your work as a shepherd to make you a leader of my people Israel.
1CH 17:8 I was with you wherever you went and I defeated all your enemies before you. Now I will make you as famous as the great men of the earth.
1CH 17:9 I will establish a place for my people Israel and settle them there; they will live there and not be disturbed anymore. Violent men will not oppress them again, as they did in the beginning
1CH 17:10 and during the time when I appointed judges to lead my people Israel. I will subdue all your enemies. “‘“I declare to you that the Lord will build a dynastic house for you!
1CH 17:11 When the time comes for you to die, I will raise up your descendant, one of your own sons, to succeed you, and I will establish his kingdom.
1CH 17:12 He will build me a house, and I will make his dynasty permanent.
1CH 17:13 I will become his father and he will become my son. I will never withhold my loyal love from him, as I withheld it from the one who ruled before you.
1CH 17:14 I will put him in permanent charge of my house and my kingdom; his dynasty will be permanent.”’”
1CH 17:15 Nathan told David all these words that were revealed to him.
1CH 17:16 David went in, sat before the Lord, and said: “Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my family, that you should have brought me to this point?
1CH 17:17 And you did not stop there, O God! You have also spoken about the future of your servant’s family. You have revealed to me what men long to know, O Lord God.
1CH 17:18 What more can David say to you? You have honored your servant; you have given your servant special recognition.
1CH 17:19 O Lord, for the sake of your servant and according to your will, you have done this great thing in order to reveal your greatness.
1CH 17:20 O Lord, there is none like you; there is no God besides you! What we heard is true!
1CH 17:21 And who is like your people, Israel, a unique nation in the earth? Their God went to claim a nation for himself! You made a name for yourself by doing great and awesome deeds when you drove out nations before your people whom you had delivered from the Egyptian empire and its gods.
1CH 17:22 You made Israel your very own nation for all time. You, O Lord, became their God.
1CH 17:23 So now, O Lord, may the promise you made about your servant and his family become a permanent reality! Do as you promised,
1CH 17:24 so it may become a reality and you may gain lasting fame, as people say, ‘The Lord who commands armies is the God of Israel.’ David’s dynasty will be established before you,
1CH 17:25 for you, my God, have revealed to your servant that you will build a dynasty for him. That is why your servant has had the courage to pray to you.
1CH 17:26 Now, O Lord, you are the true God; you have made this good promise to your servant.
1CH 17:27 Now you are willing to bless your servant’s dynasty so that it may stand permanently before you, for you, O Lord, have blessed it and it will be blessed from now on into the future.”
1CH 18:1 Later David defeated the Philistines and subdued them. He took Gath and its surrounding towns away from the Philistines.
1CH 18:2 He defeated the Moabites; the Moabites became David’s subjects and brought tribute.
1CH 18:3 David defeated King Hadadezer of Zobah as far as Hamath, when he went to extend his authority to the Euphrates River.
1CH 18:4 David seized from him 1,000 chariots, 7,000 charioteers, and 20,000 infantrymen. David cut the hamstrings of all but a hundred of Hadadezer’s chariot horses.
1CH 18:5 The Arameans of Damascus came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, but David killed 22,000 of the Arameans.
1CH 18:6 David placed garrisons in the territory of the Arameans of Damascus; the Arameans became David’s subjects and brought tribute. The Lord protected David wherever he campaigned.
1CH 18:7 David took the golden shields which Hadadezer’s servants had carried and brought them to Jerusalem.
1CH 18:8 From Tibhath and Kun, Hadadezer’s cities, David took a great deal of bronze. (Solomon used it to make the big bronze basin called “The Sea,” the pillars, and other bronze items.
1CH 18:9 When King Tou of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of King Hadadezer of Zobah,
1CH 18:10 he sent his son Hadoram to King David to extend his best wishes and to pronounce a blessing on him for his victory over Hadadezer, for Tou had been at war with Hadadezer. He also sent various items made of gold, silver, and bronze.
1CH 18:11 King David dedicated these things to the Lord, along with the silver and gold which he had carried off from all the nations, including Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek.
1CH 18:12 Abishai son of Zeruiah killed 18,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
1CH 18:13 He placed garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. The Lord protected David wherever he campaigned.
1CH 18:14 David reigned over all Israel; he guaranteed justice for all his people.
1CH 18:15 Joab son of Zeruiah was commanding general of the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was secretary;
1CH 18:16 Zadok son of Ahitub and Abimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Shavsha was scribe;
1CH 18:17 Benaiah son of Jehoiada supervised the Kerethites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were the king’s leading officials.
1CH 19:1 Later King Nahash of the Ammonites died and his son succeeded him.
1CH 19:2 David said, “I will express my loyalty to Hanun son of Nahash, for his father was loyal to me.” So David sent messengers to express his sympathy over his father’s death. When David’s servants entered Ammonite territory to visit Hanun and express the king’s sympathy,
1CH 19:3 the Ammonite officials said to Hanun, “Do you really think David is trying to honor your father by sending these messengers to express his sympathy? No, his servants have come to you so they can get information and spy out the land!”
1CH 19:4 So Hanun seized David’s servants and shaved their beards off. He cut off the lower part of their robes so that their buttocks were exposed and then sent them away.
1CH 19:5 Messengers came and told David what had happened to the men, so he summoned them, for the men were thoroughly humiliated. The king said, “Stay in Jericho until your beards grow again; then you may come back.”
1CH 19:6 When the Ammonites realized that David was disgusted with them, Hanun and the Ammonites sent 1,000 talents of silver to hire chariots and charioteers from Aram Naharaim, Aram Maacah, and Zobah.
1CH 19:7 They hired 32,000 chariots, along with the king of Maacah and his army, who came and camped in front of Medeba. The Ammonites also assembled from their cities and marched out to do battle.
1CH 19:8 When David heard the news, he sent Joab and the entire army to meet them.
1CH 19:9 The Ammonites marched out and were deployed for battle at the entrance to the city, while the kings who had come were by themselves in the field.
1CH 19:10 When Joab saw that the battle would be fought on two fronts, he chose some of Israel’s best men and deployed them against the Arameans.
1CH 19:11 He put his brother Abishai in charge of the rest of the army and they were deployed against the Ammonites.
1CH 19:12 Joab said, “If the Arameans start to overpower me, you come to my rescue. If the Ammonites start to overpower you, I will come to your rescue.
1CH 19:13 Be strong! Let’s fight bravely for the sake of our people and the cities of our God! The Lord will do what he decides is best!”
1CH 19:14 So Joab and his men marched toward the Arameans to do battle, and they fled before him.
1CH 19:15 When the Ammonites saw the Arameans flee, they fled before Joab’s brother Abishai and withdrew into the city. Joab went back to Jerusalem.
1CH 19:16 When the Arameans realized they had been defeated by Israel, they sent for reinforcements from beyond the Euphrates River, led by Shophach the commanding general of Hadadezer’s army.
1CH 19:17 When David was informed, he gathered all Israel, crossed the Jordan River, and marched against them. David deployed his army against the Arameans for battle and they fought against him.
1CH 19:18 The Arameans fled before Israel. David killed 7,000 Aramean charioteers and 40,000 infantrymen; he also killed Shophach the commanding general.
1CH 19:19 When Hadadezer’s subjects saw they were defeated by Israel, they made peace with David and became his subjects. The Arameans were no longer willing to help the Ammonites.
1CH 20:1 In the spring, at the time when kings normally conduct wars, Joab led the army into battle and devastated the land of the Ammonites. He went and besieged Rabbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem. Joab defeated Rabbah and tore it down.
1CH 20:2 David took the crown from the head of their king and wore it (its weight was a talent of gold and it was set with precious stones). He took a large amount of plunder from the city.
1CH 20:3 He removed the city’s residents and made them do hard labor with saws, iron picks, and axes. This was his policy with all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all the army returned to Jerusalem.
1CH 20:4 Later there was a battle with the Philistines in Gezer. At that time Sibbekai the Hushathite killed Sippai, one of the descendants of the Rephaim, and the Philistines were subdued.
1CH 20:5 There was another battle with the Philistines in which Elhanan son of Jair the Bethlehemite killed the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear had a shaft as big as the crossbeam of a weaver’s loom.
1CH 20:6 In a battle in Gath there was a large man who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot – twenty-four in all! He too was a descendant of Rapha.
1CH 20:7 When he taunted Israel, Jonathan son of Shimea, David’s brother, killed him.
1CH 20:8 These were the descendants of Rapha who lived in Gath; they were killed by the hand of David and his soldiers.
1CH 21:1 An adversary opposed Israel, inciting David to count how many warriors Israel had.
1CH 21:2 David told Joab and the leaders of the army, “Go, count the number of warriors from Beer Sheba to Dan. Then bring back a report to me so I may know how many we have.”
1CH 21:3 Joab replied, “May the Lord make his army a hundred times larger! My master, O king, do not all of them serve my master? Why does my master want to do this? Why bring judgment on Israel?”
1CH 21:4 But the king’s edict stood, despite Joab’s objections. So Joab left and traveled throughout Israel before returning to Jerusalem.
1CH 21:5 Joab reported to David the number of warriors. In all Israel there were 1,100,000 sword-wielding soldiers; Judah alone had 470,000 sword-wielding soldiers.
1CH 21:6 Now Joab did not number Levi and Benjamin, for the king’s edict disgusted him.
1CH 21:7 God was also offended by it, so he attacked Israel.
1CH 21:8 David said to God, “I have sinned greatly by doing this! Now, please remove the guilt of your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”
1CH 21:9 The Lord told Gad, David’s prophet,
1CH 21:10 “Go, tell David, ‘This is what the Lord says: “I am offering you three forms of judgment from which to choose. Pick one of them.”’”
1CH 21:11 Gad went to David and told him, “This is what the Lord says: ‘Pick one of these:
1CH 21:12 three years of famine, or three months being chased by your enemies and struck down by their swords, or three days being struck down by the Lord, during which a plague will invade the land and the Lord’s messenger will destroy throughout Israel’s territory.’ Now, decide what I should tell the one who sent me.”
1CH 21:13 David said to Gad, “I am very upset! I prefer to be attacked by the Lord, for his mercy is very great; I do not want to be attacked by men!”
1CH 21:14 So the Lord sent a plague through Israel, and 70,000 Israelite men died.
1CH 21:15 God sent an angel to ravage Jerusalem. As he was doing so, the Lord watched and relented from his judgment. He told the angel who was destroying, “That’s enough! Stop now!” Now the Lord’s angel was standing near the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
1CH 21:16 David looked up and saw the Lord’s messenger standing between the earth and sky with his sword drawn and in his hand, stretched out over Jerusalem. David and the leaders, covered with sackcloth, threw themselves down with their faces to the ground.
1CH 21:17 David said to God, “Was I not the one who decided to number the army? I am the one who sinned and committed this awful deed! As for these sheep – what have they done? O Lord my God, attack me and my family, but remove the plague from your people!”
1CH 21:18 So the Lord’s messenger told Gad to instruct David to go up and build an altar for the Lord on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
1CH 21:19 So David went up as Gad instructed him to do in the name of the Lord.
1CH 21:20 While Ornan was threshing wheat, he turned and saw the messenger, and he and his four sons hid themselves.
1CH 21:21 When David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David; he came out from the threshing floor and bowed to David with his face to the ground.
1CH 21:22 David said to Ornan, “Sell me the threshing floor so I can build on it an altar for the Lord – I’ll pay top price – so that the plague may be removed from the people.”
1CH 21:23 Ornan told David, “You can have it! My master, the king, may do what he wants. Look, I am giving you the oxen for burnt sacrifices, the threshing sledges for wood, and the wheat for an offering. I give it all to you.”
1CH 21:24 King David replied to Ornan, “No, I insist on buying it for top price. I will not offer to the Lord what belongs to you or offer a burnt sacrifice that cost me nothing.
1CH 21:25 So David bought the place from Ornan for 600 pieces of gold.
1CH 21:26 David built there an altar to the Lord and offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings. He called out to the Lord, and the Lord responded by sending fire from the sky and consuming the burnt sacrifice on the altar.
1CH 21:27 The Lord ordered the messenger to put his sword back into its sheath.
1CH 21:28 At that time, when David saw that the Lord responded to him at the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he sacrificed there.
1CH 21:29 Now the Lord’s tabernacle (which Moses had made in the wilderness) and the altar for burnt sacrifices were at that time at the worship center in Gibeon.
1CH 21:30 But David could not go before it to seek God’s will, for he was afraid of the sword of the Lord’s messenger.
1CH 22:1 David then said, “This is the place where the temple of the Lord God will be, along with the altar for burnt sacrifices for Israel.”
1CH 22:2 David ordered the resident foreigners in the land of Israel to be called together. He appointed some of them to be stonecutters to chisel stones for the building of God’s temple.
1CH 22:3 David supplied a large amount of iron for the nails of the doors of the gates and for braces, more bronze than could be weighed,
1CH 22:4 and more cedar logs than could be counted. (The Sidonians and Tyrians had brought a large amount of cedar logs to David.)
1CH 22:5 David said, “My son Solomon is just an inexperienced young man, and the temple to be built for the Lord must be especially magnificent so it will become famous and be considered splendid by all the nations. Therefore I will make preparations for its construction.” So David made extensive preparations before he died.
1CH 22:6 He summoned his son Solomon and charged him to build a temple for the Lord God of Israel.
1CH 22:7 David said to Solomon: “My son, I really wanted to build a temple to honor the Lord my God.
1CH 22:8 But the Lord said to me: ‘You have spilled a great deal of blood and fought many battles. You must not build a temple to honor me, for you have spilled a great deal of blood on the ground before me.
1CH 22:9 Look, you will have a son, who will be a peaceful man. I will give him rest from all his enemies on every side. Indeed, Solomon will be his name; I will give Israel peace and quiet during his reign.
1CH 22:10 He will build a temple to honor me; he will become my son, and I will become his father. I will grant to his dynasty permanent rule over Israel.’
1CH 22:11 “Now, my son, may the Lord be with you! May you succeed and build a temple for the Lord your God, just as he announced you would.
1CH 22:12 Only may the Lord give you insight and understanding when he places you in charge of Israel, so you may obey the law of the Lord your God.
1CH 22:13 Then you will succeed, if you carefully obey the rules and regulations which the Lord ordered Moses to give to Israel. Be strong and brave! Don’t be afraid and don’t panic!
1CH 22:14 Now, look, I have made every effort to supply what is needed to build the Lord’s temple. I have stored up 100,000 talents of gold, 1,000,000 talents of silver, and so much bronze and iron it cannot be weighed, as well as wood and stones. Feel free to add more!
1CH 22:15 You also have available many workers, including stonecutters, masons, carpenters, and an innumerable array of workers who are skilled
1CH 22:16 in using gold, silver, bronze, and iron. Get up and begin the work! May the Lord be with you!”
1CH 22:17 David ordered all the officials of Israel to support his son Solomon.
1CH 22:18 He told them, “The Lord your God is with you! He has made you secure on every side, for he handed over to me the inhabitants of the region and the region is subdued before the Lord and his people.
1CH 22:19 Now seek the Lord your God wholeheartedly and with your entire being! Get up and build the sanctuary of the Lord God! Then you can bring the ark of the Lord’s covenant and the holy items dedicated to God’s service into the temple that is built to honor the Lord.”
1CH 23:1 When David was old and approaching the end of his life, he made his son Solomon king over Israel.
1CH 23:2 David assembled all the leaders of Israel, along with the priests and the Levites.
1CH 23:3 The Levites who were thirty years old and up were counted; there were 38,000 men.
1CH 23:4 David said, “Of these, 24,000 are to direct the work of the Lord’s temple; 6,000 are to be officials and judges;
1CH 23:5 4,000 are to be gatekeepers; and 4,000 are to praise the Lord with the instruments I supplied for worship.”
1CH 23:6 David divided them into groups corresponding to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
1CH 23:7 The Gershonites included Ladan and Shimei.
1CH 23:8 The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the oldest, Zetham, and Joel – three in all.
1CH 23:9 The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran – three in all. These were the leaders of the family of Ladan.
1CH 23:10 The sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, Jeush, and Beriah. These were Shimei’s sons – four in all.
1CH 23:11 Jahath was the oldest and Zizah the second oldest. Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons, so they were considered one family with one responsibility.
1CH 23:12 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel – four in all.
1CH 23:13 The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. Aaron and his descendants were chosen on a permanent basis to consecrate the most holy items, to offer sacrifices before the Lord, to serve him, and to praise his name.
1CH 23:14 The descendants of Moses the man of God were considered Levites.
1CH 23:15 The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
1CH 23:16 The son of Gershom: Shebuel the oldest.
1CH 23:17 The son of Eliezer was Rehabiah, the oldest. Eliezer had no other sons, but Rehabiah had many descendants.
1CH 23:18 The son of Izhar: Shelomith the oldest.
1CH 23:19 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the oldest, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
1CH 23:20 The sons of Uzziel: Micah the oldest, and Isshiah the second.
1CH 23:21 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.
1CH 23:22 Eleazar died without having sons; he had only daughters. The sons of Kish, their cousins, married them.
1CH 23:23 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jeremoth – three in all.
1CH 23:24 These were the descendants of Levi according to their families, that is, the leaders of families as counted and individually listed who carried out assigned tasks in the Lord’s temple and were twenty years old and up.
1CH 23:25 For David said, “The Lord God of Israel has given his people rest and has permanently settled in Jerusalem.
1CH 23:26 So the Levites no longer need to carry the tabernacle or any of the items used in its service.”
1CH 23:27 According to David’s final instructions, the Levites twenty years old and up were counted.
1CH 23:28 Their job was to help Aaron’s descendants in the service of the Lord’s temple. They were to take care of the courtyards, the rooms, ceremonial purification of all holy items, and other jobs related to the service of God’s temple.
1CH 23:29 They also took care of the bread that is displayed, the flour for offerings, the unleavened wafers, the round cakes, the mixing, and all the measuring.
1CH 23:30 They also stood in a designated place every morning and offered thanks and praise to the Lord. They also did this in the evening
1CH 23:31 and whenever burnt sacrifices were offered to the Lord on the Sabbath and at new moon festivals and assemblies. A designated number were to serve before the Lord regularly in accordance with regulations.
1CH 23:32 They were in charge of the meeting tent and the holy place, and helped their relatives, the descendants of Aaron, in the service of the Lord’s temple.
1CH 24:1 The divisions of Aaron’s descendants were as follows: The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
1CH 24:2 Nadab and Abihu died before their father did; they had no sons. Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests.
1CH 24:3 David, Zadok (a descendant of Eleazar), and Ahimelech (a descendant of Ithamar) divided them into groups to carry out their assigned responsibilities.
1CH 24:4 The descendants of Eleazar had more leaders than the descendants of Ithamar, so they divided them up accordingly; the descendants of Eleazar had sixteen leaders, while the descendants of Ithamar had eight.
1CH 24:5 They divided them by lots, for there were officials of the holy place and officials designated by God among the descendants of both Eleazar and Ithamar.
1CH 24:6 The scribe Shemaiah son of Nethanel, a Levite, wrote down their names before the king, the officials, Zadok the priest, Ahimelech son of Abiathar, and the leaders of the priestly and Levite families. One family was drawn by lot from Eleazar, and then the next from Ithamar.
1CH 24:7 The first lot went to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,
1CH 24:8 the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
1CH 24:9 the fifth to Malkijah, the sixth to Mijamin,
1CH 24:10 the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
1CH 24:11 the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,
1CH 24:12 the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,
1CH 24:13 the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
1CH 24:14 the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,
1CH 24:15 the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,
1CH 24:16 the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,
1CH 24:17 the twenty-first to Jakin, the twenty-second to Gamul,
1CH 24:18 the twenty-third to Delaiah, the twenty-fourth to Maaziah.
1CH 24:19 This was the order in which they carried out their assigned responsibilities when they entered the Lord’s temple, according to the regulations given them by their ancestor Aaron, just as the Lord God of Israel had instructed him.
1CH 24:20 The rest of the Levites included: Shubael from the sons of Amram, Jehdeiah from the sons of Shubael,
1CH 24:21 the firstborn Isshiah from Rehabiah and the sons of Rehabiah,
1CH 24:22 Shelomoth from the Izharites, Jahath from the sons of Shelomoth.
1CH 24:23 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
1CH 24:24 The son of Uzziel: Micah; Shamir from the sons of Micah.
1CH 24:25 The brother of Micah: Isshiah. Zechariah from the sons of Isshiah.
1CH 24:26 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The son of Jaaziah: Beno.
1CH 24:27 The sons of Merari, from Jaaziah: Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri.
1CH 24:28 From Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
1CH 24:29 From Kish: Jerahmeel.
1CH 24:30 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the Levites, listed by their families.
1CH 24:31 Just like their relatives, the descendants of Aaron, they also cast lots before King David, Zadok, Ahimelech, the leaders of families, the priests, and the Levites. The families of the oldest son cast lots along with the those of the youngest.
1CH 25:1 David and the army officers selected some of the sons of Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun to prophesy as they played stringed instruments and cymbals. The following men were assigned this responsibility:
1CH 25:2 From the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah, and Asarelah. The sons of Asaph were supervised by Asaph, who prophesied under the king’s supervision.
1CH 25:3 From the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah – six in all, under supervision of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied as he played a harp, giving thanks and praise to the Lord.
1CH 25:4 From the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, Romamti-Ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth.
1CH 25:5 All these were the sons of Heman, the king’s prophet. God had promised him these sons in order to make him prestigious. God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
1CH 25:6 All of these were under the supervision of their fathers; they were musicians in the Lord’s temple, playing cymbals and stringed instruments as they served in God’s temple. Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman were under the supervision of the king.
1CH 25:7 They and their relatives, all of them skilled and trained to make music to the Lord, numbered two hundred eighty-eight.
1CH 25:8 They cast lots to determine their responsibilities – oldest as well as youngest, teacher as well as student.
1CH 25:9 The first lot went to Asaph’s son Joseph and his relatives and sons – twelve in all, the second to Gedaliah and his relatives and sons – twelve in all,
1CH 25:10 the third to Zaccur and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:11 the fourth to Izri and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:12 the fifth to Nethaniah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:13 the sixth to Bukkiah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:14 the seventh to Jesharelah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:15 the eighth to Jeshaiah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:16 the ninth to Mattaniah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:17 the tenth to Shimei and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:18 the eleventh to Azarel and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:19 the twelfth to Hashabiah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:20 the thirteenth to Shubael and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:21 the fourteenth to Mattithiah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:22 the fifteenth to Jerimoth and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:23 the sixteenth to Hananiah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:24 the seventeenth to Joshbekashah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:25 the eighteenth to Hanani and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:26 the nineteenth to Mallothi and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:27 the twentieth to Eliathah and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:28 the twenty-first to Hothir and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:29 the twenty-second to Giddalti and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:30 the twenty-third to Mahazioth and his sons and relatives – twelve in all,
1CH 25:31 the twenty-fourth to Romamti-Ezer and his sons and relatives – twelve in all.
1CH 26:1 The divisions of the gatekeepers: From the Korahites: Meshelemiah, son of Kore, one of the sons of Asaph.
1CH 26:2 Meshelemiah’s sons: The firstborn Zechariah, the second Jediael, the third Zebadiah, the fourth Jathniel,
1CH 26:3 the fifth Elam, the sixth Jehohanan, and the seventh Elihoenai.
1CH 26:4 Obed-Edom’s sons: The firstborn Shemaiah, the second Jehozabad, the third Joah, the fourth Sakar, the fifth Nethanel,
1CH 26:5 the sixth Ammiel, the seventh Issachar, and the eighth Peullethai. (Indeed, God blessed Obed-Edom.)
1CH 26:6 His son Shemaiah also had sons, who were leaders of their families, for they were highly respected.
1CH 26:7 The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed, and Elzabad. His relatives Elihu and Semakiah were also respected.
1CH 26:8 All these were the descendants of Obed-Edom. They and their sons and relatives were respected men, capable of doing their responsibilities. There were sixty-two of them related to Obed-Edom.
1CH 26:9 Meshelemiah had sons and relatives who were respected – eighteen in all.
1CH 26:10 Hosah, one of the descendants of Merari, had sons: The firstborn Shimri (he was not actually the firstborn, but his father gave him that status),
1CH 26:11 the second Hilkiah, the third Tebaliah, and the fourth Zechariah. All of Hosah’s sons and relatives numbered thirteen.
1CH 26:12 These divisions of the gatekeepers, corresponding to their leaders, had assigned responsibilities, like their relatives, as they served in the Lord’s temple.
1CH 26:13 They cast lots, both young and old, according to their families, to determine which gate they would be responsible for.
1CH 26:14 The lot for the east gate went to Shelemiah. They then cast lots for his son Zechariah, a wise adviser, and the lot for the north gate went to him.
1CH 26:15 Obed-Edom was assigned the south gate, and his sons were assigned the storehouses.
1CH 26:16 Shuppim and Hosah were assigned the west gate, along with the Shalleketh gate on the upper road. One guard was adjacent to another.
1CH 26:17 Each day there were six Levites posted on the east, four on the north, and four on the south. At the storehouses they were posted in pairs.
1CH 26:18 At the court on the west there were four posted on the road and two at the court.
1CH 26:19 These were the divisions of the gatekeepers who were descendants of Korah and Merari.
1CH 26:20 Their fellow Levites were in charge of the storehouses in God’s temple and the storehouses containing consecrated items.
1CH 26:21 The descendants of Ladan, who were descended from Gershon through Ladan and were leaders of the families of Ladan the Gershonite, included Jehieli
1CH 26:22 and the sons of Jehieli, Zetham and his brother Joel. They were in charge of the storehouses in the Lord’s temple.
1CH 26:23 As for the Amramites, Izharites, Hebronites, and Uzzielites:
1CH 26:24 Shebuel son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was the supervisor of the storehouses.
1CH 26:25 His relatives through Eliezer included: Rehabiah his son, Jeshaiah his son, Joram his son, Zikri his son, and Shelomith his son.
1CH 26:26 Shelomith and his relatives were in charge of all the storehouses containing the consecrated items dedicated by King David, the family leaders who led units of a thousand and a hundred, and the army officers.
1CH 26:27 They had dedicated some of the plunder taken in battles to be used for repairs on the Lord’s temple.
1CH 26:28 They were also in charge of everything dedicated by Samuel the prophet, Saul son of Kish, Abner son of Ner, and Joab son of Zeruiah; Shelomith and his relatives were in charge of everything that had been dedicated.
1CH 26:29 As for the Izharites: Kenaniah and his sons were given responsibilities outside the temple as officers and judges over Israel.
1CH 26:30 As for the Hebronites: Hashabiah and his relatives, 1,700 respected men, were assigned responsibilities in Israel west of the Jordan; they did the Lord’s work and the king’s service.
1CH 26:31 As for the Hebronites: Jeriah was the leader of the Hebronites according to the genealogical records. In the fortieth year of David’s reign, they examined the records and discovered there were highly respected men in Jazer in Gilead.
1CH 26:32 Jeriah had 2,700 relatives who were respected family leaders. King David placed them in charge of the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh; they took care of all matters pertaining to God and the king.
1CH 27:1 What follows is a list of Israelite family leaders and commanders of units of a thousand and a hundred, as well as their officers who served the king in various matters. Each division was assigned to serve for one month during the year; each consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:2 Jashobeam son of Zabdiel was in charge of the first division, which was assigned the first month. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:3 He was a descendant of Perez; he was in charge of all the army officers for the first month.
1CH 27:4 Dodai the Ahohite was in charge of the division assigned the second month; Mikloth was the next in rank. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:5 The third army commander, assigned the third month, was Benaiah son of Jehoiada the priest. He was the leader of his division, which consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:6 Benaiah was the leader of the thirty warriors and his division; his son was Ammizabad.
1CH 27:7 The fourth, assigned the fourth month, was Asahel, brother of Joab; his son Zebadiah succeeded him. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:8 The fifth, assigned the fifth month, was the commander Shamhuth the Izrahite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:9 The sixth, assigned the sixth month, was Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:10 The seventh, assigned the seventh month, was Helez the Pelonite, an Ephraimite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:11 The eighth, assigned the eighth month, was Sibbekai the Hushathite, a Zerahite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:12 The ninth, assigned the ninth month, was Abiezer the Anathothite, a Benjaminite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:13 The tenth, assigned the tenth month, was Maharai the Netophathite, a Zerahite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:14 The eleventh, assigned the eleventh month, was Benaiah the Pirathonite, an Ephraimite. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:15 The twelfth, assigned the twelfth month, was Heldai the Netophathite, a descendant of Othniel. His division consisted of 24,000 men.
1CH 27:16 The officers of the Israelite tribes: Eliezer son of Zikri was the leader of the Reubenites, Shephatiah son of Maacah led the Simeonites,
1CH 27:17 Hashabiah son of Kemuel led the Levites, Zadok led the descendants of Aaron,
1CH 27:18 Elihu, a brother of David, led Judah, Omri son of Michael led Issachar,
1CH 27:19 Ishmaiah son of Obadiah led Zebulun, Jerimoth son of Azriel led Naphtali,
1CH 27:20 Hoshea son of Azaziah led the Ephraimites, Joel son of Pedaiah led the half-tribe of Manasseh,
1CH 27:21 Iddo son of Zechariah led the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Jaasiel son of Abner led Benjamin,
1CH 27:22 Azarel son of Jeroham led Dan. These were the commanders of the Israelite tribes.
1CH 27:23 David did not count the males twenty years old and under, for the Lord had promised to make Israel as numerous as the stars in the sky.
1CH 27:24 Joab son of Zeruiah started to count the men but did not finish. God was angry with Israel because of this, so the number was not recorded in the scroll called The Annals of King David.
1CH 27:25 Azmaveth son of Adiel was in charge of the king’s storehouses; Jonathan son of Uzziah was in charge of the storehouses in the field, in the cities, in the towns, and in the towers.
1CH 27:26 Ezri son of Kelub was in charge of the field workers who farmed the land.
1CH 27:27 Shimei the Ramathite was in charge of the vineyards; Zabdi the Shiphmite was in charge of the wine stored in the vineyards.
1CH 27:28 Baal-Hanan the Gederite was in charge of the olive and sycamore trees in the lowlands; Joash was in charge of the storehouses of olive oil.
1CH 27:29 Shitrai the Sharonite was in charge of the cattle grazing in Sharon; Shaphat son of Adlai was in charge of the cattle in the valleys.
1CH 27:30 Obil the Ishmaelite was in charge of the camels; Jehdeiah the Meronothite was in charge of the donkeys.
1CH 27:31 Jaziz the Hagrite was in charge of the sheep. All these were the officials in charge of King David’s property.
1CH 27:32 Jonathan, David’s uncle, was a wise adviser and scribe; Jehiel son of Hacmoni cared for the king’s sons.
1CH 27:33 Ahithophel was the king’s adviser; Hushai the Arkite was the king’s confidant.
1CH 27:34 Ahithophel was succeeded by Jehoiada son of Benaiah and by Abiathar. Joab was the commanding general of the king’s army.
1CH 28:1 David assembled in Jerusalem all the officials of Israel, including the commanders of the tribes, the commanders of the army divisions that served the king, the commanders of units of a thousand and a hundred, the officials who were in charge of all the property and livestock of the king and his sons, the eunuchs, and the warriors, including the most skilled of them.
1CH 28:2 King David rose to his feet and said: “Listen to me, my brothers and my people. I wanted to build a temple where the ark of the Lord’s covenant could be placed as a footstool for our God. I have made the preparations for building it.
1CH 28:3 But God said to me, ‘You must not build a temple to honor me, for you are a warrior and have spilled blood.’
1CH 28:4 The Lord God of Israel chose me out of my father’s entire family to become king over Israel and have a permanent dynasty. Indeed, he chose Judah as leader, and my father’s family within Judah, and then he picked me out from among my father’s sons and made me king over all Israel.
1CH 28:5 From all the many sons the Lord has given me, he chose Solomon my son to rule on his behalf over Israel.
1CH 28:6 He said to me, ‘Solomon your son is the one who will build my temple and my courts, for I have chosen him to become my son and I will become his father.
1CH 28:7 I will establish his kingdom permanently, if he remains committed to obeying my commands and regulations, as you are doing this day.’
1CH 28:8 So now, in the sight of all Israel, the Lord’s assembly, and in the hearing of our God, I say this: Carefully observe all the commands of the Lord your God, so that you may possess this good land and may leave it as a permanent inheritance for your children after you.
1CH 28:9 “And you, Solomon my son, obey the God of your father and serve him with a submissive attitude and a willing spirit, for the Lord examines all minds and understands every motive of one’s thoughts. If you seek him, he will let you find him, but if you abandon him, he will reject you permanently.
1CH 28:10 Realize now that the Lord has chosen you to build a temple as his sanctuary. Be strong and do it!”
1CH 28:11 David gave to his son Solomon the blueprints for the temple porch, its buildings, its treasuries, its upper areas, its inner rooms, and the room for atonement.
1CH 28:12 He gave him the blueprints of all he envisioned for the courts of the Lord’s temple, all the surrounding rooms, the storehouses of God’s temple, and the storehouses for the holy items.
1CH 28:13 He gave him the regulations for the divisions of priests and Levites, for all the assigned responsibilities within the Lord’s temple, and for all the items used in the service of the Lord’s temple.
1CH 28:14 He gave him the prescribed weight for all the gold items to be used in various types of service in the Lord’s temple, for all the silver items to be used in various types of service,
1CH 28:15 for the gold lampstands and their gold lamps, including the weight of each lampstand and its lamps, for the silver lampstands, including the weight of each lampstand and its lamps, according to the prescribed use of each lampstand,
1CH 28:16 for the gold used in the display tables, including the amount to be used in each table, for the silver to be used in the silver tables,
1CH 28:17 for the pure gold used for the meat forks, bowls, and jars, for the small gold bowls, including the weight for each bowl, for the small silver bowls, including the weight for each bowl,
1CH 28:18 and for the refined gold of the incense altar. He gave him the blueprint for the seat of the gold cherubim that spread their wings and provide shelter for the ark of the Lord’s covenant.
1CH 28:19 David said, “All of this I put in writing as the Lord directed me and gave me insight regarding the details of the blueprints.”
1CH 28:20 David said to his son Solomon: “Be strong and brave! Do it! Don’t be afraid and don’t panic! For the Lord God, my God, is with you. He will not leave you or abandon you before all the work for the service of the Lord’s temple is finished.
1CH 28:21 Here are the divisions of the priests and Levites who will perform all the service of God’s temple. All the willing and skilled men are ready to assist you in all the work and perform their service. The officials and all the people are ready to follow your instructions.”
1CH 29:1 King David said to the entire assembly: “My son Solomon, the one whom God has chosen, is just an inexperienced young man, and the task is great, for this palace is not for man, but for the Lord God.
1CH 29:2 So I have made every effort to provide what is needed for the temple of my God, including the gold, silver, bronze, iron, wood, as well as a large amount of onyx, settings of antimony and other stones, all kinds of precious stones, and alabaster.
1CH 29:3 Now, to show my commitment to the temple of my God, I donate my personal treasure of gold and silver to the temple of my God, in addition to all that I have already supplied for this holy temple.
1CH 29:4 This includes 3,000 talents of gold from Ophir and 7,000 talents of refined silver for overlaying the walls of the buildings,
1CH 29:5 for gold and silver items, and for all the work of the craftsmen. Who else wants to contribute to the Lord today?”
1CH 29:6 The leaders of the families, the leaders of the Israelite tribes, the commanders of units of a thousand and a hundred, and the supervisors of the king’s work contributed willingly.
1CH 29:7 They donated for the service of God’s temple 5,000 talents and ten thousand darics of gold, 10,000 talents of silver, 18,000 talents of bronze, and 100,000 talents of iron.
1CH 29:8 All who possessed precious stones donated them to the treasury of the Lord’s temple, which was under the supervision of Jehiel the Gershonite.
1CH 29:9 The people were delighted with their donations, for they contributed to the Lord with a willing attitude; King David was also very happy.
1CH 29:10 David praised the Lord before the entire assembly: “O Lord God of our father Israel, you deserve praise forevermore!
1CH 29:11 O Lord, you are great, mighty, majestic, magnificent, glorious, and sovereign over all the sky and earth! You have dominion and exalt yourself as the ruler of all.
1CH 29:12 You are the source of wealth and honor; you rule over all. You possess strength and might to magnify and give strength to all.
1CH 29:13 Now, our God, we give thanks to you and praise your majestic name!
1CH 29:14 “But who am I and who are my people, that we should be in a position to contribute this much? Indeed, everything comes from you, and we have simply given back to you what is yours.
1CH 29:15 For we are resident foreigners and nomads in your presence, like all our ancestors; our days are like a shadow on the earth, without security.
1CH 29:16 O Lord our God, all this wealth, which we have collected to build a temple for you to honor your holy name, comes from you; it all belongs to you.
1CH 29:17 I know, my God, that you examine thoughts and are pleased with integrity. With pure motives I contribute all this; and now I look with joy as your people who have gathered here contribute to you.
1CH 29:18 O Lord God of our ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, maintain the motives of your people and keep them devoted to you.
1CH 29:19 Make my son Solomon willing to obey your commands, rules, and regulations, and to complete building the palace for which I have made preparations.”
1CH 29:20 David told the entire assembly: “Praise the Lord your God!” So the entire assembly praised the Lord God of their ancestors; they bowed down and stretched out flat on the ground before the Lord and the king.
1CH 29:21 The next day they made sacrifices and offered burnt sacrifices to the Lord (1,000 bulls, 1,000 rams, 1,000 lambs), along with their accompanying drink offerings and many other sacrifices for all Israel.
1CH 29:22 They held a feast before the Lord that day and celebrated. Then they designated Solomon, David’s son, as king a second time; before the Lord they anointed him as ruler and Zadok as priest.
1CH 29:23 Solomon sat on the Lord’s throne as king in place of his father David; he was successful and all Israel was loyal to him.
1CH 29:24 All the officers and warriors, as well as all of King David’s sons, pledged their allegiance to King Solomon.
1CH 29:25 The Lord greatly magnified Solomon before all Israel and bestowed on him greater majesty than any king of Israel before him.
1CH 29:26 David son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
1CH 29:27 He reigned over Israel forty years; he reigned in Hebron seven years and in Jerusalem thirty-three years.
1CH 29:28 He died at a good old age, having enjoyed long life, wealth, and honor. His son Solomon succeeded him.
1CH 29:29 King David’s accomplishments, from start to finish, are recorded in the Annals of Samuel the prophet, the Annals of Nathan the prophet, and the Annals of Gad the prophet.
1CH 29:30 Recorded there are all the facts about his reign and accomplishments, and an account of the events that involved him, Israel, and all the neighboring kingdoms.
2CH 1:1 Solomon son of David solidified his royal authority, for the Lord his God was with him and magnified him greatly.
2CH 1:2 Solomon addressed all Israel, including those who commanded units of a thousand and a hundred, the judges, and all the leaders of all Israel who were heads of families.
2CH 1:3 Solomon and the entire assembly went to the worship center in Gibeon, for the tent where they met God was located there, which Moses the Lord’s servant had made in the wilderness.
2CH 1:4 (Now David had brought up the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim to the place he had prepared for it, for he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem.
2CH 1:5 But the bronze altar made by Bezalel son of Uri, son of Hur, was in front of the Lord’s tabernacle. Solomon and the entire assembly prayed to him there.)
2CH 1:6 Solomon went up to the bronze altar before the Lord which was at the meeting tent, and he offered up a thousand burnt sacrifices.
2CH 1:7 That night God appeared to Solomon and said to him, “Tell me what I should give you.”
2CH 1:8 Solomon replied to God, “You demonstrated great loyalty to my father David and have made me king in his place.
2CH 1:9 Now, Lord God, may your promise to my father David be realized, for you have made me king over a great nation as numerous as the dust of the earth.
2CH 1:10 Now give me wisdom and discernment so I can effectively lead this nation. Otherwise no one is able to make judicial decisions for this great nation of yours.”
2CH 1:11 God said to Solomon, “Because you desire this, and did not ask for riches, wealth, and honor, or for vengeance on your enemies, and because you did not ask for long life, but requested wisdom and discernment so you can make judicial decisions for my people over whom I have made you king,
2CH 1:12 you are granted wisdom and discernment. Furthermore I am giving you riches, wealth, and honor surpassing that of any king before or after you.”
2CH 1:13 Solomon left the meeting tent at the worship center in Gibeon and went to Jerusalem, where he reigned over Israel.
2CH 1:14 Solomon accumulated chariots and horses. He had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses. He kept them in assigned cities and in Jerusalem.
2CH 1:15 The king made silver and gold as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones; cedar was as plentiful as sycamore fig trees are in the lowlands.
2CH 1:16 Solomon acquired his horses from Egypt and from Que; the king’s traders purchased them from Que.
2CH 1:17 They paid 600 silver pieces for each chariot from Egypt, and 150 silver pieces for each horse. They also sold chariots and horses to all the kings of the Hittites and to the kings of Syria.
2CH 2:1 Solomon ordered a temple to be built to honor the Lord, as well as a royal palace for himself.
2CH 2:2 Solomon had 70,000 common laborers and 80,000 stonecutters in the hills, in addition to 3,600 supervisors.
2CH 2:3 Solomon sent a message to King Huram of Tyre: “Help me as you did my father David, when you sent him cedar logs for the construction of his palace.
2CH 2:4 Look, I am ready to build a temple to honor the Lord my God and to dedicate it to him in order to burn fragrant incense before him, to set out the bread that is regularly displayed, and to offer burnt sacrifices each morning and evening, and on Sabbaths, new moon festivals, and at other times appointed by the Lord our God. This is something Israel must do on a permanent basis.
2CH 2:5 I will build a great temple, for our God is greater than all gods.
2CH 2:6 Of course, who can really build a temple for him, since the sky and the highest heavens cannot contain him? Who am I that I should build him a temple! It will really be only a place to offer sacrifices before him.
2CH 2:7 “Now send me a man who is skilled in working with gold, silver, bronze, and iron, as well as purple, crimson, and violet colored fabrics, and who knows how to engrave. He will work with my skilled craftsmen here in Jerusalem and Judah, whom my father David provided.
2CH 2:8 Send me cedars, evergreens, and algum trees from Lebanon, for I know your servants are adept at cutting down trees in Lebanon. My servants will work with your servants
2CH 2:9 to supply me with large quantities of timber, for I am building a great, magnificent temple.
2CH 2:10 Look, I will pay your servants who cut the timber 20,000 kors of ground wheat, 20,000 kors of barley, 120,000 gallons of wine, and 120,000 gallons of olive oil.”
2CH 2:11 King Huram of Tyre sent this letter to Solomon: “Because the Lord loves his people, he has made you their king.”
2CH 2:12 Huram also said, “Worthy of praise is the Lord God of Israel, who made the sky and the earth! He has given David a wise son who has discernment and insight and will build a temple for the Lord, as well as a royal palace for himself.
2CH 2:13 Now I am sending you Huram Abi, a skilled and capable man,
2CH 2:14 whose mother is a Danite and whose father is a Tyrian. He knows how to work with gold, silver, bronze, iron, stones, and wood, as well as purple, violet, white, and crimson fabrics. He knows how to do all kinds of engraving and understands any design given to him. He will work with your skilled craftsmen and the skilled craftsmen of my lord David your father.
2CH 2:15 Now let my lord send to his servants the wheat, barley, olive oil, and wine he has promised;
2CH 2:16 we will get all the timber you need from Lebanon and bring it in raft-like bundles by sea to Joppa. You can then haul it on up to Jerusalem.”
2CH 2:17 Solomon took a census of all the male resident foreigners in the land of Israel, after the census his father David had taken. There were 153,600 in all.
2CH 2:18 He designated 70,000 as common laborers, 80,000 as stonecutters in the hills, and 3,600 as supervisors to make sure the people completed the work.
2CH 3:1 Solomon began building the Lord’s temple in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where the Lord had appeared to his father David. This was the place that David prepared at the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
2CH 3:2 He began building on the second day of the second month of the fourth year of his reign.
2CH 3:3 Solomon laid the foundation for God’s temple; its length (determined according to the old standard of measure) was 90 feet, and its width 30 feet.
2CH 3:4 The porch in front of the main hall was 30 feet long, corresponding to the width of the temple, and its height was 30 feet. He plated the inside with pure gold.
2CH 3:5 He paneled the main hall with boards made from evergreen trees and plated it with fine gold, decorated with palm trees and chains.
2CH 3:6 He decorated the temple with precious stones; the gold he used came from Parvaim.
2CH 3:7 He overlaid the temple’s rafters, thresholds, walls and doors with gold; he carved decorative cherubim on the walls.
2CH 3:8 He made the most holy place; its length was 30 feet, corresponding to the width of the temple, and its width 30 feet. He plated it with 600 talents of fine gold.
2CH 3:9 The gold nails weighed 50 shekels; he also plated the upper areas with gold.
2CH 3:10 In the most holy place he made two images of cherubim and plated them with gold.
2CH 3:11 The combined wing span of the cherubs was 30 feet. One of the first cherub’s wings was seven and one-half feet long and touched one wall of the temple; its other wing was also seven and one-half feet long and touched one of the second cherub’s wings.
2CH 3:12 Likewise one of the second cherub’s wings was seven and one-half feet long and touched the other wall of the temple; its other wing was also seven and one-half feet long and touched one of the first cherub’s wings.
2CH 3:13 The combined wingspan of these cherubim was 30 feet. They stood upright, facing inward.
2CH 3:14 He made the curtain out of violet, purple, crimson, and white fabrics, and embroidered on it decorative cherubim.
2CH 3:15 In front of the temple he made two pillars which had a combined length of 52½ feet, with each having a plated capital seven and one-half feet high.
2CH 3:16 He made ornamental chains and put them on top of the pillars. He also made one hundred pomegranate-shaped ornaments and arranged them within the chains.
2CH 3:17 He set up the pillars in front of the temple, one on the right side and the other on the left. He named the one on the right Jachin, and the one on the left Boaz.
2CH 4:1 He made a bronze altar, 30 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 15 feet high.
2CH 4:2 He also made the big bronze basin called “The Sea.” It measured 15 feet from rim to rim, was circular in shape, and stood seven and one-half feet high. Its circumference was 45 feet.
2CH 4:3 Images of bulls were under it all the way around, ten every eighteen inches all the way around. The bulls were in two rows and had been cast with “The Sea.”
2CH 4:4 “The Sea” stood on top of twelve bulls. Three faced northward, three westward, three southward, and three eastward. “The Sea” was placed on top of them, and they all faced outward.
2CH 4:5 It was four fingers thick and its rim was like that of a cup shaped like a lily blossom. It could hold 18,000 gallons.
2CH 4:6 He made ten washing basins; he put five on the south side and five on the north side. In them they rinsed the items used for burnt sacrifices; the priests washed in “The Sea.”
2CH 4:7 He made ten gold lampstands according to specifications and put them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left.
2CH 4:8 He made ten tables and set them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left. He also made one hundred gold bowls.
2CH 4:9 He made the courtyard of the priests and the large enclosure and its doors; he plated their doors with bronze.
2CH 4:10 He put “The Sea” on the south side, in the southeast corner.
2CH 4:11 Huram Abi made the pots, shovels, and bowls. He finished all the work on God’s temple he had been assigned by King Solomon.
2CH 4:12 He made the two pillars, the two bowl-shaped tops of the pillars, the latticework for the bowl-shaped tops of the two pillars,
2CH 4:13 the four hundred pomegranate-shaped ornaments for the latticework of the two pillars (each latticework had two rows of these ornaments at the bowl-shaped top of the pillar),
2CH 4:14 the ten movable stands with their ten basins,
2CH 4:15 the big bronze basin called “The Sea” with its twelve bulls underneath,
2CH 4:16 and the pots, shovels, and meat forks. All the items King Solomon assigned Huram Abi to make for the Lord’s temple were made from polished bronze.
2CH 4:17 The king had them cast in earthen foundries in the region of the Jordan between Succoth and Zarethan.
2CH 4:18 Solomon made so many of these items they did not weigh the bronze.
2CH 4:19 Solomon also made these items for God’s temple: the gold altar, the tables on which the Bread of the Presence was kept,
2CH 4:20 the pure gold lampstands and their lamps which burned as specified at the entrance to the inner sanctuary,
2CH 4:21 the pure gold flower-shaped ornaments, lamps, and tongs,
2CH 4:22 the pure gold trimming shears, basins, pans, and censers, and the gold door sockets for the inner sanctuary (the most holy place) and for the doors of the main hall of the temple.
2CH 5:1 When Solomon had finished constructing the Lord’s temple, he put the holy items that belonged to his father David (the silver, gold, and all the other articles) in the treasuries of God’s temple.
2CH 5:2 Then Solomon convened Israel’s elders – all the leaders of the Israelite tribes and families – in Jerusalem, so they could witness the transferal of the ark of the covenant of the Lord from the City of David (that is, Zion).
2CH 5:3 All the men of Israel assembled before the king during the festival in the seventh month.
2CH 5:4 When all Israel’s elders had arrived, the Levites lifted the ark.
2CH 5:5 The priests and Levites carried the ark, the tent where God appeared to his people, and all the holy items in the tent.
2CH 5:6 Now King Solomon and all the Israelites who had assembled with him went on ahead of the ark and sacrificed more sheep and cattle than could be counted or numbered.
2CH 5:7 The priests brought the ark of the covenant of the Lord to its assigned place in the inner sanctuary of the temple, in the most holy place under the wings of the cherubs.
2CH 5:8 The cherubs’ wings extended over the place where the ark sat; the cherubs overshadowed the ark and its poles.
2CH 5:9 The poles were so long their ends extending out from the ark were visible from in front of the inner sanctuary, but they could not be seen from beyond that point. They have remained there to this very day.
2CH 5:10 There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets Moses had placed there in Horeb. (It was there that the Lord made an agreement with the Israelites after he brought them out of the land of Egypt.)
2CH 5:11 The priests left the holy place. All the priests who participated had consecrated themselves, no matter which division they represented.
2CH 5:12 All the Levites who were musicians, including Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and relatives, wore linen. They played cymbals and stringed instruments as they stood east of the altar. They were accompanied by 120 priests who blew trumpets.
2CH 5:13 The trumpeters and musicians played together, praising and giving thanks to the Lord. Accompanied by trumpets, cymbals, and other instruments, they loudly praised the Lord, singing: “Certainly he is good; certainly his loyal love endures!” Then a cloud filled the Lord’s temple.
2CH 5:14 The priests could not carry out their duties because of the cloud; the Lord’s splendor filled God’s temple.
2CH 6:1 Then Solomon said, “The Lord has said that he lives in thick darkness.
2CH 6:2 O Lord, I have built a lofty temple for you, a place where you can live permanently.”
2CH 6:3 Then the king turned around and pronounced a blessing over the whole Israelite assembly as they stood there.
2CH 6:4 He said, “The Lord God of Israel is worthy of praise because he has fulfilled what he promised my father David.
2CH 6:5 He told David, ‘Since the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I have not chosen a city from all the tribes of Israel to build a temple in which to live. Nor did I choose a man as leader of my people Israel.
2CH 6:6 But now I have chosen Jerusalem as a place to live, and I have chosen David to lead my people Israel.’
2CH 6:7 Now my father David had a strong desire to build a temple to honor the Lord God of Israel.
2CH 6:8 The Lord told my father David, ‘It is right for you to have a strong desire to build a temple to honor me.
2CH 6:9 But you will not build the temple; your very own son will build the temple for my honor.’
2CH 6:10 The Lord has kept the promise he made. I have taken my father David’s place and have occupied the throne of Israel, as the Lord promised. I have built this temple for the honor of the Lord God of Israel
2CH 6:11 and set up in it a place for the ark containing the covenant the Lord made with the Israelites.”
2CH 6:12 He stood before the altar of the Lord in front of the entire assembly of Israel and spread out his hands.
2CH 6:13 Solomon had made a bronze platform and had placed it in the middle of the enclosure. It was seven and one-half feet long, seven and one-half feet wide, and four and one-half feet high. He stood on it and then got down on his knees in front of the entire assembly of Israel. He spread out his hands toward the sky,
2CH 6:14 and prayed: “O Lord God of Israel, there is no god like you in heaven or on earth! You maintain covenantal loyalty to your servants who obey you with sincerity.
2CH 6:15 You have kept your word to your servant, my father David; this very day you have fulfilled what you promised.
2CH 6:16 Now, O Lord God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant, my father David, when you said, ‘You will never fail to have a successor ruling before me on the throne of Israel, provided that your descendants watch their step and obey my law as you have done.’
2CH 6:17 Now, O Lord God of Israel, may the promise you made to your servant David be realized.
2CH 6:18 “God does not really live with humankind on the earth! Look, if the sky and the highest heaven cannot contain you, how much less this temple I have built!
2CH 6:19 But respond favorably to your servant’s prayer and his request for help, O Lord my God. Answer the desperate prayer your servant is presenting to you.
2CH 6:20 Night and day may you watch over this temple, the place where you promised you would live. May you answer your servant’s prayer for this place.
2CH 6:21 Respond to the requests of your servant and your people Israel for this place. Hear from your heavenly dwelling place and respond favorably and forgive.
2CH 6:22 “When someone is accused of sinning against his neighbor and the latter pronounces a curse on the alleged offender before your altar in this temple,
2CH 6:23 listen from heaven and make a just decision about your servants’ claims. Condemn the guilty party, declare the other innocent, and give both of them what they deserve.
2CH 6:24 “If your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they sinned against you, then if they come back to you, renew their allegiance to you, and pray for your help before you in this temple,
2CH 6:25 then listen from heaven, forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them back to the land you gave to them and their ancestors.
2CH 6:26 “The time will come when the skies are shut up tightly and no rain falls because your people sinned against you. When they direct their prayers toward this place, renew their allegiance to you, and turn away from their sin because you punish them,
2CH 6:27 then listen from heaven and forgive the sin of your servants, your people Israel. Certainly you will then teach them the right way to live and send rain on your land that you have given your people to possess.
2CH 6:28 “The time will come when the land suffers from a famine, a plague, blight, and disease, or a locust invasion, or when their enemy lays siege to the cities of the land, or when some other type of plague or epidemic occurs.
2CH 6:29 When all your people Israel pray and ask for help, as they acknowledge their intense pain and spread out their hands toward this temple,
2CH 6:30 then listen from your heavenly dwelling place, forgive their sin, and act favorably toward each one based on your evaluation of their motives. (Indeed you are the only one who can correctly evaluate the motives of all people.)
2CH 6:31 Then they will honor you by obeying you throughout their lifetimes as they live on the land you gave to our ancestors.
2CH 6:32 “Foreigners, who do not belong to your people Israel, will come from a distant land because of your great reputation and your ability to accomplish mighty deeds; they will come and direct their prayers toward this temple.
2CH 6:33 Then listen from your heavenly dwelling place and answer all the prayers of the foreigners. Then all the nations of the earth will acknowledge your reputation, obey you like your people Israel do, and recognize that this temple I built belongs to you.
2CH 6:34 “When you direct your people to march out and fight their enemies, and they direct their prayers to you toward this chosen city and this temple I built for your honor,
2CH 6:35 then listen from heaven to their prayers for help and vindicate them.
2CH 6:36 “The time will come when your people will sin against you (for there is no one who is sinless!) and you will be angry at them and deliver them over to their enemies, who will take them as prisoners to their land, whether far away or close by.
2CH 6:37 When your people come to their senses in the land where they are held prisoner, they will repent and beg for your mercy in the land of their imprisonment, admitting, ‘We have sinned and gone astray , we have done evil!’
2CH 6:38 When they return to you with all their heart and being in the land where they are held prisoner and direct their prayers toward the land you gave to their ancestors, your chosen city, and the temple I built for your honor,
2CH 6:39 then listen from your heavenly dwelling place to their prayers for help, vindicate them, and forgive your sinful people.
2CH 6:40 “Now, my God, may you be attentive and responsive to the prayers offered in this place.
2CH 6:41 Now ascend, O Lord God, to your resting place, you and the ark of your strength! May your priests, O Lord God, experience your deliverance! May your loyal followers rejoice in the prosperity you give!
2CH 6:42 O Lord God, do not reject your chosen ones! Remember the faithful promises you made to your servant David!”
2CH 7:1 When Solomon finished praying, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and the Lord’s splendor filled the temple.
2CH 7:2 The priests were unable to enter the Lord’s temple because the Lord’s splendor filled the Lord’s temple.
2CH 7:3 When all the Israelites saw the fire come down and the Lord’s splendor over the temple, they got on their knees with their faces downward toward the pavement. They worshiped and gave thanks to the Lord, saying, “Certainly he is good; certainly his loyal love endures!”
2CH 7:4 The king and all the people were presenting sacrifices to the Lord.
2CH 7:5 King Solomon sacrificed 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Then the king and all the people dedicated God’s temple.
2CH 7:6 The priests stood in their assigned spots, along with the Levites who had the musical instruments used for praising the Lord. (These were the ones King David made for giving thanks to the Lord and which were used by David when he offered praise, saying, “Certainly his loyal love endures.”) Opposite the Levites, the priests were blowing the trumpets, while all Israel stood there.
2CH 7:7 Solomon consecrated the middle of the courtyard that is in front of the Lord’s temple. He offered burnt sacrifices, grain offerings, and the fat from the peace offerings there, because the bronze altar that Solomon had made was too small to hold all these offerings.
2CH 7:8 At that time Solomon and all Israel with him celebrated a festival for seven days. This great assembly included people from Lebo Hamath in the north to the Brook of Egypt in the south.
2CH 7:9 On the eighth day they held an assembly, for they had dedicated the altar for seven days and celebrated the festival for seven more days.
2CH 7:10 On the twenty-third day of the seventh month, Solomon sent the people home. They left happy and contented because of the good the Lord had done for David, Solomon, and his people Israel.
2CH 7:11 After Solomon finished building the Lord’s temple and the royal palace, and accomplished all his plans for the Lord’s temple and his royal palace,
2CH 7:12 the Lord appeared to Solomon at night and said to him: “I have answered your prayer and chosen this place to be my temple where sacrifices are to be made.
2CH 7:13 When I close up the sky so that it doesn’t rain, or command locusts to devour the land’s vegetation, or send a plague among my people,
2CH 7:14 if my people, who belong to me, humble themselves, pray, seek to please me, and repudiate their sinful practices, then I will respond from heaven, forgive their sin, and heal their land.
2CH 7:15 Now I will be attentive and responsive to the prayers offered in this place.
2CH 7:16 Now I have chosen and consecrated this temple by making it my permanent home; I will be constantly present there.
2CH 7:17 You must serve me as your father David did. Do everything I commanded and obey my rules and regulations.
2CH 7:18 Then I will establish your dynasty, just as I promised your father David, ‘You will not fail to have a successor ruling over Israel.’
2CH 7:19 “But if you people ever turn away from me, fail to obey the regulations and rules I instructed you to keep, and decide to serve and worship other gods,
2CH 7:20 then I will remove you from my land I have given you, I will abandon this temple I have consecrated with my presence, and I will make you an object of mockery and ridicule among all the nations.
2CH 7:21 As for this temple, which was once majestic, everyone who passes by it will be shocked and say, ‘Why did the Lord do this to this land and this temple?’
2CH 7:22 Others will then answer, ‘Because they abandoned the Lord God of their ancestors, who led them out of Egypt. They embraced other gods whom they worshiped and served. That is why he brought all this disaster down on them.’”
2CH 8:1 After twenty years, during which Solomon built the Lord’s temple and his royal palace,
2CH 8:2 Solomon rebuilt the cities that Huram had given him and settled Israelites there.
2CH 8:3 Solomon went to Hamath Zobah and seized it.
2CH 8:4 He built up Tadmor in the wilderness and all the storage cities he had built in Hamath.
2CH 8:5 He made upper Beth Horon and lower Beth Horon fortified cities with walls and barred gates,
2CH 8:6 and built up Baalath, all the storage cities that belonged to him, and all the cities where chariots and horses were kept. He built whatever he wanted in Jerusalem, Lebanon, and throughout his entire kingdom.
2CH 8:7 Now several non-Israelite peoples were left in the land after the conquest of Joshua, including the Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
2CH 8:8 Their descendants remained in the land (the Israelites were unable to wipe them out). Solomon conscripted them for his work crews and they continue in that role to this very day.
2CH 8:9 Solomon did not assign Israelites to these work crews; the Israelites served as his soldiers, officers, charioteers, and commanders of his chariot forces.
2CH 8:10 These men worked for Solomon as supervisors; there were a total of 250 of them who were in charge of the people.
2CH 8:11 Solomon moved Pharaoh’s daughter up from the City of David to the palace he had built for her, for he said, “My wife must not live in the palace of King David of Israel, for the places where the ark of the Lord has entered are holy.”
2CH 8:12 Then Solomon offered burnt sacrifices to the Lord on the altar of the Lord which he had built in front of the temple’s porch.
2CH 8:13 He observed the daily requirements for sacrifices that Moses had specified for Sabbaths, new moon festivals, and the three annual celebrations – the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Temporary Shelters.
2CH 8:14 As his father David had decreed, Solomon appointed the divisions of the priests to do their assigned tasks, the Levitical orders to lead worship and help the priests with their daily tasks, and the divisions of the gatekeepers to serve at their assigned gates. This was what David the man of God had ordered.
2CH 8:15 They did not neglect any detail of the king’s orders pertaining to the priests, Levites, and treasuries.
2CH 8:16 All the work ordered by Solomon was completed, from the day the foundation of the Lord’s temple was laid until it was finished; the Lord’s temple was completed.
2CH 8:17 Then Solomon went to Ezion Geber and to Elat on the coast in the land of Edom.
2CH 8:18 Huram sent him ships and some of his sailors, men who were well acquainted with the sea. They sailed with Solomon’s men to Ophir, and took from there 450 talents of gold, which they brought back to King Solomon.
2CH 9:1 When the queen of Sheba heard about Solomon, she came to challenge him with difficult questions. She arrived in Jerusalem with a great display of pomp, bringing with her camels carrying spices, a very large quantity of gold, and precious gems. She visited Solomon and discussed with him everything that was on her mind.
2CH 9:2 Solomon answered all her questions; there was no question too complex for the king.
2CH 9:3 When the queen of Sheba saw for herself Solomon’s extensive wisdom, the palace he had built,
2CH 9:4 the food in his banquet hall, his servants and attendants in their robes, his cupbearers in their robes, and his burnt sacrifices which he presented in the Lord’s temple, she was amazed.
2CH 9:5 She said to the king, “The report I heard in my own country about your wise sayings and insight was true!
2CH 9:6 I did not believe these things until I came and saw them with my own eyes. Indeed, I didn’t hear even half the story! Your wisdom surpasses what was reported to me.
2CH 9:7 Your attendants, who stand before you at all times and hear your wise sayings, are truly happy!
2CH 9:8 May the Lord your God be praised because he favored you by placing you on his throne as the one ruling on his behalf! Because of your God’s love for Israel and his lasting commitment to them, he made you king over them so you could make just and right decisions.”
2CH 9:9 She gave the king 120 talents of gold and a very large quantity of spices and precious gems. The quantity of spices the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon has never been matched.
2CH 9:10 (Huram’s servants, aided by Solomon’s servants, brought gold from Ophir, as well as fine timber and precious gems.
2CH 9:11 With the timber the king made steps for the Lord’s temple and royal palace as well as stringed instruments for the musicians. No one had seen anything like them in the land of Judah prior to that. )
2CH 9:12 King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba everything she requested, more than what she had brought him. Then she left and returned to her homeland with her attendants.
2CH 9:13 Solomon received 666 talents of gold per year,
2CH 9:14 besides what he collected from the merchants and traders. All the Arabian kings and the governors of the land also brought gold and silver to Solomon.
2CH 9:15 King Solomon made two hundred large shields of hammered gold; 600 measures of hammered gold were used for each shield.
2CH 9:16 He also made three hundred small shields of hammered gold; 300 measures of gold were used for each of those shields. The king placed them in the Palace of the Lebanon Forest.
2CH 9:17 The king made a large throne decorated with ivory and overlaid it with pure gold.
2CH 9:18 There were six steps leading up to the throne, and a gold footstool was attached to the throne. The throne had two armrests with a statue of a lion standing on each side.
2CH 9:19 There were twelve statues of lions on the six steps, one lion at each end of each step. There was nothing like it in any other kingdom.
2CH 9:20 All of King Solomon’s cups were made of gold, and all the household items in the Palace of the Lebanon Forest were made of pure gold. There were no silver items, for silver was not considered very valuable in Solomon’s time.
2CH 9:21 The king had a fleet of large merchant ships manned by Huram’s men that sailed the sea. Once every three years the fleet came into port with cargoes of gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
2CH 9:22 King Solomon was wealthier and wiser than any of the kings of the earth.
2CH 9:23 All the kings of the earth wanted to visit Solomon to see him display his God-given wisdom.
2CH 9:24 Year after year visitors brought their gifts, which included items of silver, items of gold, clothes, perfume, spices, horses, and mules.
2CH 9:25 Solomon had 4,000 stalls for his chariot horses and 12,000 horses. He kept them in assigned cities and in Jerusalem.
2CH 9:26 He ruled all the kingdoms from the Euphrates River to the land of the Philistines as far as the border of Egypt.
2CH 9:27 The king made silver as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones; cedar was as plentiful as sycamore fig trees are in the lowlands .
2CH 9:28 Solomon acquired horses from Egypt and from all the lands.
2CH 9:29 The rest of the events of Solomon’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Annals of Nathan the Prophet, the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and the Vision of Iddo the Seer pertaining to Jeroboam son of Nebat.
2CH 9:30 Solomon ruled over all Israel from Jerusalem for forty years.
2CH 9:31 Then Solomon passed away and was buried in the city of his father David. His son Rehoboam replaced him as king.
2CH 10:1 Rehoboam traveled to Shechem, for all Israel had gathered in Shechem to make Rehoboam king.
2CH 10:2 When Jeroboam son of Nebat heard the news, he was still in Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon. Jeroboam returned from Egypt.
2CH 10:3 They sent for him and Jeroboam and all Israel came and spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
2CH 10:4 “Your father made us work too hard! Now if you lighten the demands he made and don’t make us work as hard, we will serve you.”
2CH 10:5 He said to them, “Go away for three days, then return to me.” So the people went away.
2CH 10:6 King Rehoboam consulted with the older advisers who had served his father Solomon when he had been alive. He asked them, “How do you advise me to answer these people?”
2CH 10:7 They said to him, “If you are fair to these people, grant their request, and are cordial to them, they will be your servants from this time forward.”
2CH 10:8 But Rehoboam rejected their advice and consulted the young advisers who served him, with whom he had grown up.
2CH 10:9 He asked them, “How do you advise me to respond to these people who said to me, ‘Lessen the demands your father placed on us’?”
2CH 10:10 The young advisers with whom Rehoboam had grown up said to him, “Say this to these people who have said to you, ‘Your father made us work hard, but now lighten our burden’ – say this to them: ‘I am a lot harsher than my father!
2CH 10:11 My father imposed heavy demands on you; I will make them even heavier. My father punished you with ordinary whips; I will punish you with whips that really sting your flesh.’”
2CH 10:12 Jeroboam and all the people reported to Rehoboam on the third day, just as the king had ordered when he said, “Return to me on the third day.”
2CH 10:13 The king responded to the people harshly. He rejected the advice of the older men
2CH 10:14 and followed the advice of the younger ones. He said, “My father imposed heavy demands on you; I will make them even heavier. My father punished you with ordinary whips; I will punish you with whips that really sting your flesh.”
2CH 10:15 The king refused to listen to the people, because God was instigating this turn of events so that he might bring to pass the prophetic announcement he had made through Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam son of Nebat.
2CH 10:16 When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people answered the king, “We have no portion in David – no share in the son of Jesse! Return to your homes, O Israel! Now, look after your own dynasty, O David!” So all Israel returned to their homes.
2CH 10:17 (Rehoboam continued to rule over the Israelites who lived in the cities of Judah.)
2CH 10:18 King Rehoboam sent Hadoram, the supervisor of the work crews, out after them, but the Israelites stoned him to death. King Rehoboam managed to jump into his chariot and escape to Jerusalem.
2CH 10:19 So Israel has been in rebellion against the Davidic dynasty to this very day.
2CH 11:1 When Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he summoned 180,000 skilled warriors from Judah and Benjamin to attack Israel and restore the kingdom to Rehoboam.
2CH 11:2 But the Lord told Shemaiah the prophet,
2CH 11:3 “Say this to King Rehoboam son of Solomon of Judah and to all the Israelites in Judah and Benjamin,
2CH 11:4 ‘The Lord says this: “Do not attack and make war with your brothers. Each of you go home, for I have caused this to happen.”’” They obeyed the Lord and called off the attack against Jeroboam.
2CH 11:5 Rehoboam lived in Jerusalem; he built up these fortified cities throughout Judah:
2CH 11:6 Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa,
2CH 11:7 Beth Zur, Soco, Adullam,
2CH 11:8 Gath, Mareshah, Ziph,
2CH 11:9 Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah,
2CH 11:10 Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron. These were the fortified cities in Judah and Benjamin.
2CH 11:11 He fortified these cities and placed officers in them, as well as storehouses of food, olive oil, and wine.
2CH 11:12 In each city there were shields and spears; he strongly fortified them. Judah and Benjamin belonged to him.
2CH 11:13 The priests and Levites who lived throughout Israel supported him, no matter where they resided.
2CH 11:14 The Levites even left their pasturelands and their property behind and came to Judah and Jerusalem, for Jeroboam and his sons prohibited them from serving as the Lord’s priests.
2CH 11:15 Jeroboam appointed his own priests to serve at the worship centers and to lead in the worship of the goat idols and calf idols he had made.
2CH 11:16 Those among all the Israelite tribes who were determined to worship the Lord God of Israel followed them to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the Lord God of their ancestors.
2CH 11:17 They supported the kingdom of Judah and were loyal to Rehoboam son of Solomon for three years; they followed the edicts of David and Solomon for three years.
2CH 11:18 Rehoboam married Mahalath the daughter of David’s son Jerimoth and of Abihail, the daughter of Jesse’s son Eliab.
2CH 11:19 She bore him sons named Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham.
2CH 11:20 He later married Maacah the daughter of Absalom. She bore to him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith.
2CH 11:21 Rehoboam loved Maacah daughter of Absalom more than his other wives and concubines. He had eighteen wives and sixty concubines; he fathered twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters.
2CH 11:22 Rehoboam appointed Abijah son of Maacah as the leader over his brothers, for he intended to name him his successor.
2CH 11:23 He wisely placed some of his many sons throughout the regions of Judah and Benjamin in the various fortified cities. He supplied them with abundant provisions and acquired many wives for them.
2CH 12:1 After Rehoboam’s rule was established and solidified, he and all Israel rejected the law of the Lord.
2CH 12:2 Because they were unfaithful to the Lord, in King Rehoboam’s fifth year, King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem.
2CH 12:3 He had 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen, and an innumerable number of soldiers who accompanied him from Egypt, including Libyans, Sukkites, and Cushites.
2CH 12:4 He captured the fortified cities of Judah and marched against Jerusalem.
2CH 12:5 Shemaiah the prophet visited Rehoboam and the leaders of Judah who were assembled in Jerusalem because of Shishak. He said to them, “This is what the Lord says: ‘You have rejected me, so I have rejected you and will hand you over to Shishak.’”
2CH 12:6 The leaders of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said, “The Lord is just.”
2CH 12:7 When the Lord saw that they humbled themselves, he gave this message to Shemaiah: “They have humbled themselves, so I will not destroy them. I will deliver them soon. My anger will not be unleashed against Jerusalem through Shishak.
2CH 12:8 Yet they will become his subjects, so they can experience how serving me differs from serving the surrounding nations.”
2CH 12:9 King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem and took away the treasures of the Lord’s temple and of the royal palace; he took everything, including the gold shields that Solomon had made.
2CH 12:10 King Rehoboam made bronze shields to replace them and assigned them to the officers of the royal guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace.
2CH 12:11 Whenever the king visited the Lord’s temple, the royal guards carried them and then brought them back to the guardroom.
2CH 12:12 So when Rehoboam humbled himself, the Lord relented from his anger and did not annihilate him; Judah experienced some good things.
2CH 12:13 King Rehoboam solidified his rule in Jerusalem; he was forty-one years old when he became king and he ruled for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the Lord chose from all the tribes of Israel to be his home. Rehoboam’s mother was an Ammonite named Naamah.
2CH 12:14 He did evil because he was not determined to follow the Lord.
2CH 12:15 The events of Rehoboam’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Annals of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer that include genealogical records.
2CH 12:16 Then Rehoboam passed away and was buried in the City of David. His son Abijah replaced him as king.
2CH 13:1 In the eighteenth year of the reign of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king over Judah.
2CH 13:2 He ruled for three years in Jerusalem. His mother was Michaiah, the daughter of Uriel from Gibeah. There was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
2CH 13:3 Abijah launched the attack with 400,000 well-trained warriors, while Jeroboam deployed against him 800,000 well-trained warriors.
2CH 13:4 Abijah ascended Mount Zemaraim, in the Ephraimite hill country, and said: “Listen to me, Jeroboam and all Israel!
2CH 13:5 Don’t you realize that the Lord God of Israel has given David and his dynasty lasting dominion over Israel by a formal agreement?
2CH 13:6 Jeroboam son of Nebat, a servant of Solomon son of David, rose up and rebelled against his master.
2CH 13:7 Lawless good-for-nothing men gathered around him and conspired against Rehoboam son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was an inexperienced young man and could not resist them.
2CH 13:8 Now you are declaring that you will resist the Lord’s rule through the Davidic dynasty. You have a huge army, and bring with you the gold calves that Jeroboam made for you as gods.
2CH 13:9 But you banished the Lord’s priests, Aaron’s descendants, and the Levites, and appointed your own priests just as the surrounding nations do! Anyone who comes to consecrate himself with a young bull or seven rams becomes a priest of these fake gods!
2CH 13:10 But as for us, the Lord is our God and we have not rejected him. Aaron’s descendants serve as the Lord’s priests and the Levites assist them with the work.
2CH 13:11 They offer burnt sacrifices to the Lord every morning and every evening, along with fragrant incense. They arrange the Bread of the Presence on a ritually clean table and light the lamps on the gold lampstand every evening. Certainly we are observing the Lord our God’s regulations, but you have rejected him.
2CH 13:12 Now look, God is with us as our leader. His priests are ready to blow the trumpets to signal the attack against you. You Israelites, don’t fight against the Lord God of your ancestors, for you will not win!”
2CH 13:13 Now Jeroboam had sent some men to ambush the Judahite army from behind. The main army was in front of the Judahite army; the ambushers were behind it.
2CH 13:14 The men of Judah turned around and realized they were being attacked from the front and the rear. So they cried out for help to the Lord. The priests blew their trumpets,
2CH 13:15 and the men of Judah gave the battle cry. As the men of Judah gave the battle cry, the Lord struck down Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.
2CH 13:16 The Israelites fled from before the Judahite army, and God handed them over to the men of Judah.
2CH 13:17 Abijah and his army thoroughly defeated them; 500,000 well-trained Israelite men fell dead.
2CH 13:18 That day the Israelites were defeated; the men of Judah prevailed because they relied on the Lord God of their ancestors.
2CH 13:19 Abijah chased Jeroboam; he seized from him these cities: Bethel and its surrounding towns, Jeshanah and its surrounding towns, and Ephron and its surrounding towns.
2CH 13:20 Jeroboam did not regain power during the reign of Abijah. The Lord struck him down and he died.
2CH 13:21 Abijah’s power grew; he had fourteen wives and fathered twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.
2CH 13:22 The rest of the events of Abijah’s reign, including his deeds and sayings, are recorded in the writings of the prophet Iddo.
2CH 14:1 Abijah passed away and was buried in the City of David. His son Asa replaced him as king. During his reign the land had rest for ten years.
2CH 14:2 Asa did what the Lord his God desired and approved.
2CH 14:3 He removed the pagan altars and the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the Asherah poles.
2CH 14:4 He ordered Judah to seek the Lord God of their ancestors and to observe his law and commands.
2CH 14:5 He removed the high places and the incense altars from all the cities of Judah. The kingdom had rest under his rule.
2CH 14:6 He built fortified cities throughout Judah, for the land was at rest and there was no war during those years; the Lord gave him peace.
2CH 14:7 He said to the people of Judah: “Let’s build these cities and fortify them with walls, towers, and barred gates. The land remains ours because we have followed the Lord our God and he has made us secure on all sides.” So they built the cities and prospered.
2CH 14:8 Asa had an army of 300,000 men from Judah, equipped with large shields and spears. He also had 280,000 men from Benjamin who carried small shields and were adept archers; they were all skilled warriors.
2CH 14:9 Zerah the Cushite marched against them with an army of 1,000,000 men and 300 chariots. He arrived at Mareshah,
2CH 14:10 and Asa went out to oppose him. They deployed for battle in the Valley of Zephathah near Mareshah.
2CH 14:11 Asa prayed to the Lord his God: “O Lord, there is no one but you who can help the weak when they are vastly outnumbered. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rely on you and have marched on your behalf against this huge army. O Lord our God, don’t let men prevail against you!”
2CH 14:12 The Lord struck down the Cushites before Asa and Judah. The Cushites fled,
2CH 14:13 and Asa and his army chased them as far as Gerar. The Cushites were wiped out; they were shattered before the Lord and his army. The men of Judah carried off a huge amount of plunder.
2CH 14:14 They defeated all the cities surrounding Gerar, for the Lord caused them to panic. The men of Judah looted all the cities, for they contained a huge amount of goods.
2CH 14:15 They also attacked the tents of the herdsmen in charge of the livestock. They carried off many sheep and camels and then returned to Jerusalem.
2CH 15:1 God’s Spirit came upon Azariah son of Oded.
2CH 15:2 He met Asa and told him, “Listen to me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin! The Lord is with you when you are loyal to him. If you seek him, he will respond to you, but if you reject him, he will reject you.
2CH 15:3 For a long time Israel had no true God, or priest to instruct them, or law.
2CH 15:4 Because of their distress, they turned back to the Lord God of Israel. They sought him and he responded to them.
2CH 15:5 In those days no one could travel safely, for total chaos had overtaken all the people of the surrounding lands.
2CH 15:6 One nation was crushed by another, and one city by another, for God caused them to be in great turmoil.
2CH 15:7 But as for you, be strong and don’t get discouraged, for your work will be rewarded.”
2CH 15:8 When Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he was encouraged. He removed the detestable idols from the entire land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities he had seized in the Ephraimite hill country. He repaired the altar of the Lord in front of the porch of the Lord’s temple.
2CH 15:9 He assembled all Judah and Benjamin, as well as the settlers from Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon who had come to live with them. Many people from Israel had come there to live when they saw that the Lord his God was with him.
2CH 15:10 They assembled in Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign.
2CH 15:11 At that time they sacrificed to the Lord some of the plunder they had brought back, including 700 head of cattle and 7,000 sheep.
2CH 15:12 They solemnly agreed to seek the Lord God of their ancestors with their whole heart and being.
2CH 15:13 Anyone who would not seek the Lord God of Israel would be executed, whether they were young or old, male or female.
2CH 15:14 They swore their allegiance to the Lord, shouting their approval loudly and sounding trumpets and horns.
2CH 15:15 All Judah was happy about the oath, because they made the vow with their whole heart. They willingly sought the Lord and he responded to them. He made them secure on every side.
2CH 15:16 King Asa also removed Maacah his grandmother from her position as queen mother because she had made a loathsome Asherah pole. Asa cut down her Asherah pole and crushed and burned it in the Kidron Valley.
2CH 15:17 The high places were not eliminated from Israel, yet Asa was wholeheartedly devoted to the Lord throughout his lifetime.
2CH 15:18 He brought the holy items that his father and he had made into God’s temple, including the silver, gold, and other articles.
2CH 15:19 There was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign.
2CH 16:1 In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign, King Baasha of Israel attacked Judah, and he established Ramah as a military outpost to prevent anyone from leaving or entering the land of King Asa of Judah.
2CH 16:2 Asa took all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of the Lord’s temple and of the royal palace and sent it to King Ben Hadad of Syria, ruler in Damascus, along with this message:
2CH 16:3 “I want to make a treaty with you, like the one our fathers made. See, I have sent you silver and gold. Break your treaty with King Baasha of Israel, so he will retreat from my land.”
2CH 16:4 Ben Hadad accepted King Asa’s offer and ordered his army commanders to attack the cities of Israel. They conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel Maim, and all the storage cities of Naphtali.
2CH 16:5 When Baasha heard the news, he stopped fortifying Ramah and abandoned the project.
2CH 16:6 King Asa ordered all the men of Judah to carry away the stones and wood that Baasha had used to build Ramah. He used the materials to build up Geba and Mizpah.
2CH 16:7 At that time Hanani the prophet visited King Asa of Judah and said to him: “Because you relied on the king of Syria and did not rely on the Lord your God, the army of the king of Syria has escaped from your hand.
2CH 16:8 Did not the Cushites and Libyans have a huge army with chariots and a very large number of horsemen? But when you relied on the Lord, he handed them over to you!
2CH 16:9 Certainly the Lord watches the whole earth carefully and is ready to strengthen those who are devoted to him. You have acted foolishly in this matter; from now on you will have war.
2CH 16:10 Asa was so angry at the prophet, he put him in jail. Asa also oppressed some of the people at that time.
2CH 16:11 The events of Asa’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH 16:12 In the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa developed a foot disease. Though his disease was severe, he did not seek the Lord, but only the doctors.
2CH 16:13 Asa passed away in the forty-first year of his reign.
2CH 16:14 He was buried in the tomb he had carved out in the City of David. They laid him to rest on a bier covered with spices and assorted mixtures of ointments. They made a huge bonfire to honor him.
2CH 17:1 His son Jehoshaphat replaced him as king and solidified his rule over Israel.
2CH 17:2 He placed troops in all of Judah’s fortified cities and posted garrisons throughout the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim that his father Asa had seized.
2CH 17:3 The Lord was with Jehoshaphat because he followed in his ancestor David’s footsteps at the beginning of his reign. He did not seek the Baals,
2CH 17:4 but instead sought the God of his ancestors and obeyed his commands, unlike the Israelites.
2CH 17:5 The Lord made his kingdom secure; all Judah brought tribute to Jehoshaphat, and he became very wealthy and greatly respected.
2CH 17:6 He was committed to following the Lord; he even removed the high places and Asherah poles from Judah.
2CH 17:7 In the third year of his reign he sent his officials Ben-Hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah to teach in the cities of Judah.
2CH 17:8 They were accompanied by the Levites Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tob-Adonijah, and by the priests Elishama and Jehoram.
2CH 17:9 They taught throughout Judah, taking with them the scroll of the law of the Lord. They traveled to all the cities of Judah and taught the people.
2CH 17:10 The Lord put fear into all the kingdoms surrounding Judah; they did not make war with Jehoshaphat.
2CH 17:11 Some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat tribute, including a load of silver. The Arabs brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 goats from their flocks.
2CH 17:12 Jehoshaphat’s power kept increasing. He built fortresses and storage cities throughout Judah.
2CH 17:13 He had many supplies stored in the cities of Judah and an army of skilled warriors stationed in Jerusalem.
2CH 17:14 These were their divisions by families: There were a thousand officers from Judah. Adnah the commander led 300,000 skilled warriors,
2CH 17:15 Jehochanan the commander led 280,000,
2CH 17:16 and Amasiah son of Zikri, who volunteered to serve the Lord, led 200,000 skilled warriors.
2CH 17:17 From Benjamin, Eliada, a skilled warrior, led 200,000 men who were equipped with bows and shields,
2CH 17:18 and Jehozabad led 180,000 trained warriors.
2CH 17:19 These were the ones who served the king, besides those whom the king placed in the fortified cities throughout Judah.
2CH 18:1 Jehoshaphat was very wealthy and greatly respected. He made an alliance by marriage with Ahab,
2CH 18:2 and after several years went down to visit Ahab in Samaria. Ahab slaughtered many sheep and cattle to honor Jehoshaphat and those who came with him. He persuaded him to join in an attack against Ramoth Gilead.
2CH 18:3 King Ahab of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Will you go with me to attack Ramoth Gilead?” Jehoshaphat replied to the king of Israel, “I will support you; my army is at your disposal and will support you in battle.”
2CH 18:4 Then Jehoshaphat added, “First seek an oracle from the Lord.”
2CH 18:5 So the king of Israel assembled 400 prophets and asked them, “Should we attack Ramoth Gilead or not?” They said, “Attack! God will hand it over to the king.”
2CH 18:6 But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there not a prophet of the Lord still here, that we may ask him?”
2CH 18:7 The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat, “There is still one man through whom we can seek the Lord’s will. But I despise him because he does not prophesy prosperity for me, but always disaster. His name is Micaiah son of Imlah. Jehoshaphat said, “The king should not say such things!”
2CH 18:8 The king of Israel summoned an officer and said, “Quickly bring Micaiah son of Imlah.”
2CH 18:9 Now the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah were sitting on their respective thrones, dressed in their royal robes, at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. All the prophets were prophesying before them.
2CH 18:10 Zedekiah son of Kenaanah made iron horns and said, “This is what the Lord says, ‘With these you will gore Syria until they are destroyed!’”
2CH 18:11 All the prophets were prophesying the same, saying, “Attack Ramoth Gilead! You will succeed; the Lord will hand it over to the king!”
2CH 18:12 Now the messenger who went to summon Micaiah said to him, “Look, the prophets are in complete agreement that the king will succeed. Your words must agree with theirs; you must predict success!”
2CH 18:13 But Micaiah said, “As certainly as the Lord lives, I will say what my God tells me to say!”
2CH 18:14 Micaiah came before the king and the king asked him, “Micaiah, should we attack Ramoth Gilead or not?” He answered him, “Attack! You will succeed; they will be handed over to you.”
2CH 18:15 The king said to him, “How many times must I make you solemnly promise in the name of the Lord to tell me only the truth?”
2CH 18:16 Micaiah replied, “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep that have no shepherd. Then the Lord said, ‘They have no master. They should go home in peace.’”
2CH 18:17 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Didn’t I tell you he does not prophesy prosperity for me, but disaster?”
2CH 18:18 Micaiah said, “That being the case, hear the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, with all the heavenly assembly standing on his right and on his left.
2CH 18:19 The Lord said, ‘Who will deceive King Ahab of Israel, so he will attack Ramoth Gilead and die there?’ One said this and another that.
2CH 18:20 Then a spirit stepped forward and stood before the Lord. He said, ‘I will deceive him.’ The Lord asked him, ‘How?’
2CH 18:21 He replied, ‘I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets.’ The Lord said, ‘Deceive and overpower him. Go out and do as you have proposed.’
2CH 18:22 So now, look, the Lord has placed a lying spirit in the mouths of all these prophets of yours; but the Lord has decreed disaster for you.”
2CH 18:23 Zedekiah son of Kenaanah approached, hit Micaiah on the jaw, and said, “Which way did the Lord’s spirit go when he went from me to speak to you?”
2CH 18:24 Micaiah replied, “Look, you will see in the day when you go into an inner room to hide.”
2CH 18:25 Then the king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the city official and Joash the king’s son.
2CH 18:26 Say, ‘This is what the king says: “Put this man in prison. Give him only a little bread and water until I return safely.”’”
2CH 18:27 Micaiah said, “If you really do return safely, then the Lord has not spoken through me!” Then he added, “Take note, all you people.”
2CH 18:28 The king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah attacked Ramoth Gilead.
2CH 18:29 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and then enter the battle; but you wear your royal attire.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and they entered the battle.
2CH 18:30 Now the king of Syria had ordered his chariot commanders, “Do not fight common soldiers or high ranking officers; fight only the king of Israel!”
2CH 18:31 When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “He must be the king of Israel!” So they turned and attacked him, but Jehoshaphat cried out. The Lord helped him; God lured them away from him.
2CH 18:32 When the chariot commanders realized he was not the king of Israel, they turned away from him.
2CH 18:33 Now an archer shot an arrow at random and it struck the king of Israel between the plates of his armor. The king ordered his charioteer, “Turn around and take me from the battle line, for I am wounded.”
2CH 18:34 While the battle raged throughout the day, the king stood propped up in his chariot opposite the Syrians. He died in the evening as the sun was setting.
2CH 19:1 When King Jehoshaphat of Judah returned home safely to Jerusalem,
2CH 19:2 the prophet Jehu son of Hanani confronted him; he said to King Jehoshaphat, “Is it right to help the wicked and be an ally of those who oppose the Lord? Because you have done this the Lord is angry with you!
2CH 19:3 Nevertheless you have done some good things; you removed the Asherah poles from the land and you were determined to follow the Lord.”
2CH 19:4 Jehoshaphat lived in Jerusalem. He went out among the people from Beer Sheba to the hill country of Ephraim and encouraged them to follow the Lord God of their ancestors.
2CH 19:5 He appointed judges throughout the land and in each of the fortified cities of Judah.
2CH 19:6 He told the judges, “Be careful what you do, for you are not judging for men, but for the Lord, who will be with you when you make judicial decisions.
2CH 19:7 Respect the Lord and make careful decisions, for the Lord our God disapproves of injustice, partiality, and bribery.”
2CH 19:8 In Jerusalem Jehoshaphat appointed some Levites, priests, and Israelite family leaders to judge on behalf of the Lord and to settle disputes among the residents of Jerusalem.
2CH 19:9 He commanded them: “Carry out your duties with respect for the Lord, with honesty, and with pure motives.
2CH 19:10 Whenever your countrymen who live in the cities bring a case before you (whether it involves a violent crime or other matters related to the law, commandments, rules, and regulations), warn them that they must not sin against the Lord. If you fail to do so, God will be angry with you and your colleagues; but if you obey, you will be free of guilt.
2CH 19:11 You will report to Amariah the chief priest in all matters pertaining to the Lord’s law, and to Zebadiah son of Ishmael, the leader of the family of Judah, in all matters pertaining to the king. The Levites will serve as officials before you. Confidently carry out your duties! May the Lord be with those who do well!”
2CH 20:1 Later the Moabites and Ammonites, along with some of the Meunites, attacked Jehoshaphat.
2CH 20:2 Messengers arrived and reported to Jehoshaphat, “A huge army is attacking you from the other side of the Dead Sea, from the direction of Edom. Look, they are in Hazezon Tamar (that is, En Gedi).”
2CH 20:3 Jehoshaphat was afraid, so he decided to seek the Lord’s advice. He decreed that all Judah should observe a fast.
2CH 20:4 The people of Judah assembled to ask for the Lord’s help; they came from all the cities of Judah to ask for the Lord’s help.
2CH 20:5 Jehoshaphat stood before the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem at the Lord’s temple, in front of the new courtyard.
2CH 20:6 He prayed: “O Lord God of our ancestors, you are the God who lives in heaven and rules over all the kingdoms of the nations. You possess strength and power; no one can stand against you.
2CH 20:7 Our God, you drove out the inhabitants of this land before your people Israel and gave it as a permanent possession to the descendants of your friend Abraham.
2CH 20:8 They settled down in it and built in it a temple to honor you, saying,
2CH 20:9 ‘If disaster comes on us in the form of military attack, judgment, plague, or famine, we will stand in front of this temple before you, for you are present in this temple. We will cry out to you for help in our distress, so that you will hear and deliver us.’
2CH 20:10 Now the Ammonites, Moabites, and men from Mount Seir are coming! When Israel came from the land of Egypt, you did not allow them to invade these lands. They bypassed them and did not destroy them.
2CH 20:11 Look how they are repaying us! They come to drive us out of our allotted land which you assigned to us!
2CH 20:12 Our God, will you not judge them? For we are powerless against this huge army that attacks us! We don’t know what we should do; we look to you for help.”
2CH 20:13 All the men of Judah were standing before the Lord, along with their infants, wives, and children.
2CH 20:14 Then in the midst of the assembly, the Lord’s Spirit came upon Jachaziel son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of Mattaniah, a Levite and descendant of Asaph.
2CH 20:15 He said: “Pay attention, all you people of Judah, residents of Jerusalem, and King Jehoshaphat! This is what the Lord says to you: ‘Don’t be afraid and don’t panic because of this huge army! For the battle is not yours, but God’s.
2CH 20:16 Tomorrow march down against them as they come up the Ascent of Ziz. You will find them at the end of the ravine in front of the Desert of Jeruel.
2CH 20:17 You will not fight in this battle. Take your positions, stand, and watch the Lord deliver you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Don’t be afraid and don’t panic! Tomorrow march out toward them; the Lord is with you!’”
2CH 20:18 Jehoshaphat bowed down with his face toward the ground, and all the people of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem fell down before the Lord and worshiped him.
2CH 20:19 Then some Levites, from the Kohathites and Korahites, got up and loudly praised the Lord God of Israel.
2CH 20:20 Early the next morning they marched out to the Desert of Tekoa. When they were ready to march, Jehoshaphat stood up and said: “Listen to me, you people of Judah and residents of Jerusalem! Trust in the Lord your God and you will be safe! Trust in the message of his prophets and you will win.”
2CH 20:21 He met with the people and appointed musicians to play before the Lord and praise his majestic splendor. As they marched ahead of the warriors they said: “Give thanks to the Lord, for his loyal love endures.”
2CH 20:22 When they began to shout and praise, the Lord suddenly attacked the Ammonites, Moabites, and men from Mount Seir who were invading Judah, and they were defeated.
2CH 20:23 The Ammonites and Moabites attacked the men from Mount Seir and annihilated them. When they had finished off the men of Seir, they attacked and destroyed one another.
2CH 20:24 When the men of Judah arrived at the observation post overlooking the desert and looked at the huge army, they saw dead bodies on the ground; there were no survivors!
2CH 20:25 Jehoshaphat and his men went to gather the plunder; they found a huge amount of supplies, clothing and valuable items. They carried away everything they could. There was so much plunder, it took them three days to haul it off.
2CH 20:26 On the fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Berachah, where they praised the Lord. So that place is called the Valley of Berachah to this very day.
2CH 20:27 Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem returned joyfully to Jerusalem with Jehoshaphat leading them; the Lord had given them reason to rejoice over their enemies.
2CH 20:28 They entered Jerusalem to the sound of stringed instruments and trumpets and proceeded to the temple of the Lord.
2CH 20:29 All the kingdoms of the surrounding lands were afraid of God when they heard how the Lord had fought against Israel’s enemies.
2CH 20:30 Jehoshaphat’s kingdom enjoyed peace; his God made him secure on every side.
2CH 20:31 Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he became king and he reigned for twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi.
2CH 20:32 He followed in his father Asa’s footsteps and was careful to do what the Lord approved.
2CH 20:33 However, the high places were not eliminated; the people were still not devoted to the God of their ancestors.
2CH 20:34 The rest of the events of Jehoshaphat’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Annals of Jehu son of Hanani which are included in Scroll of the Kings of Israel.
2CH 20:35 Later King Jehoshaphat of Judah made an alliance with King Ahaziah of Israel, who did evil.
2CH 20:36 They agreed to make large seagoing merchant ships; they built the ships in Ezion Geber.
2CH 20:37 Eliezer son of Dodavahu from Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, “Because you made an alliance with Ahaziah, the Lord will shatter what you have made.” The ships were wrecked and unable to go to sea.
2CH 21:1 Jehoshaphat passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the City of David. His son Jehoram replaced him as king.
2CH 21:2 His brothers, Jehoshaphat’s sons, were Azariah, Jechiel, Zechariah, Azariahu, Michael, and Shephatiah. All of these were sons of King Jehoshaphat of Israel.
2CH 21:3 Their father gave them many presents, including silver, gold, and other precious items, along with fortified cities in Judah. But he gave the kingdom to Jehoram because he was the firstborn.
2CH 21:4 Jehoram took control of his father’s kingdom and became powerful. Then he killed all his brothers, as well as some of the officials of Israel.
2CH 21:5 Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem.
2CH 21:6 He followed in the footsteps of the kings of Israel, just as Ahab’s dynasty had done, for he married Ahab’s daughter. He did evil in the sight of the Lord.
2CH 21:7 But the Lord was unwilling to destroy David’s dynasty because of the promise he had made to give David a perpetual dynasty.
2CH 21:8 During Jehoram’s reign Edom freed themselves from Judah’s control and set up their own king.
2CH 21:9 Jehoram crossed over to Zair with his officers and all his chariots. The Edomites, who had surrounded him, attacked at night and defeated him and his chariot officers.
2CH 21:10 So Edom has remained free from Judah’s control to this very day. At that same time Libnah also rebelled and freed themselves from Judah’s control because Jehoram rejected the Lord God of his ancestors.
2CH 21:11 He also built high places on the hills of Judah; he encouraged the residents of Jerusalem to be unfaithful to the Lord and led Judah away from the Lord.
2CH 21:12 Jehoram received this letter from Elijah the prophet: “This is what the Lord God of your ancestor David says: ‘You have not followed in the footsteps of your father Jehoshaphat and of King Asa of Judah,
2CH 21:13 but have instead followed in the footsteps of the kings of Israel. You encouraged the people of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem to be unfaithful to the Lord, just as the family of Ahab does in Israel. You also killed your brothers, members of your father’s family, who were better than you.
2CH 21:14 So look, the Lord is about to severely afflict your people, your sons, your wives, and all you own.
2CH 21:15 And you will get a serious, chronic intestinal disease which will cause your intestines to come out.”
2CH 21:16 The Lord stirred up against Jehoram the Philistines and the Arabs who lived beside the Cushites.
2CH 21:17 They attacked Judah and swept through it. They carried off everything they found in the royal palace, including his sons and wives. None of his sons was left, except for his youngest, Ahaziah.
2CH 21:18 After all this happened, the Lord afflicted him with an incurable intestinal disease.
2CH 21:19 After about two years his intestines came out because of the disease, so that he died a very painful death. His people did not make a bonfire to honor him, as they had done for his ancestors.
2CH 21:20 Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. No one regretted his death; he was buried in the City of David, but not in the royal tombs.
2CH 22:1 The residents of Jerusalem made his youngest son Ahaziah king in his place, for the raiding party that invaded the city with the Arabs had killed all the older sons. So Ahaziah son of Jehoram became king of Judah.
2CH 22:2 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king and he reigned for one year in Jerusalem. His mother was Athaliah, the granddaughter of Omri.
2CH 22:3 He followed in the footsteps of Ahab’s dynasty, for his mother gave him evil advice.
2CH 22:4 He did evil in the sight of the Lord like Ahab’s dynasty because, after his father’s death, they gave him advice that led to his destruction.
2CH 22:5 He followed their advice and joined Ahab’s son King Joram of Israel in a battle against King Hazael of Syria at Ramoth Gilead in which the Syrians defeated Joram.
2CH 22:6 Joram returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds he received from the Syrians in Ramah when he fought against King Hazael of Syria. Ahaziah son of King Jehoram of Judah went down to visit Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he had been wounded.
2CH 22:7 God brought about Ahaziah’s downfall through his visit to Joram. When Ahaziah arrived, he went out with Joram to meet Jehu son of Nimshi, whom the Lord had commissioned to wipe out Ahab’s family.
2CH 22:8 While Jehu was dishing out punishment to Ahab’s family, he discovered the officials of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah’s relatives who were serving Ahaziah and killed them.
2CH 22:9 He looked for Ahaziah, who was captured while hiding in Samaria. They brought him to Jehu and then executed him. They did give him a burial, for they reasoned, “He is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the Lord with his whole heart.” There was no one in Ahaziah’s family strong enough to rule in his place.
2CH 22:10 When Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she was determined to destroy the entire royal line of Judah.
2CH 22:11 So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of King Jehoram, took Ahaziah’s son Joash and sneaked him away from the rest of the royal descendants who were to be executed. She hid him and his nurse in the room where the bed covers were stored. So Jehoshabeath the daughter of King Jehoram, wife of Jehoiada the priest and sister of Ahaziah, hid him from Athaliah so she could not execute him.
2CH 22:12 He remained in hiding in God’s temple for six years, while Athaliah was ruling over the land.
2CH 23:1 In the seventh year Jehoiada made a bold move. He made a pact with the officers of the units of hundreds: Azariah son of Jehoram, Ishmael son of Jehochanan, Azariah son of Obed, Maaseiah son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat son of Zikri.
2CH 23:2 They traveled throughout Judah and assembled the Levites from all the cities of Judah, as well as the Israelite family leaders. They came to Jerusalem,
2CH 23:3 and the whole assembly made a covenant with the king in the temple of God. Jehoiada said to them, “The king’s son will rule, just as the Lord promised David’s descendants.
2CH 23:4 This is what you must do. One third of you priests and Levites who are on duty during the Sabbath will guard the doors.
2CH 23:5 Another third of you will be stationed at the royal palace and still another third at the Foundation Gate. All the others will stand in the courtyards of the Lord’s temple.
2CH 23:6 No one must enter the Lord’s temple except the priests and Levites who are on duty. They may enter because they are ceremonially pure. All the others should carry out their assigned service to the Lord.
2CH 23:7 The Levites must surround the king. Each of you must hold his weapon in his hand. Whoever tries to enter the temple must be killed. You must accompany the king wherever he goes.”
2CH 23:8 The Levites and all the men of Judah did just as Jehoiada the priest ordered. Each of them took his men, those who were on duty during the Sabbath as well as those who were off duty on the Sabbath. Jehoiada the priest did not release his divisions from their duties.
2CH 23:9 Jehoiada the priest gave to the officers of the units of hundreds King David’s spears and shields that were kept in God’s temple.
2CH 23:10 He placed the men at their posts, each holding his weapon in his hand. They lined up from the south side of the temple to the north side and stood near the altar and the temple, surrounding the king.
2CH 23:11 Jehoiada and his sons led out the king’s son and placed on him the crown and the royal insignia. They proclaimed him king and poured olive oil on his head. They declared, “Long live the king!”
2CH 23:12 When Athaliah heard the royal guard shouting and praising the king, she joined the crowd at the Lord’s temple.
2CH 23:13 Then she saw the king standing by his pillar at the entrance. The officers and trumpeters stood beside the king and all the people of the land were celebrating and blowing trumpets, and the musicians with various instruments were leading the celebration. Athaliah tore her clothes and yelled, “Treason! Treason!”
2CH 23:14 Jehoiada the priest sent out the officers of the units of hundreds, who were in charge of the army, and ordered them, “Bring her outside the temple to the guards. Put the sword to anyone who follows her.” The priest gave this order because he had decided she should not be executed in the Lord’s temple.
2CH 23:15 They seized her and took her into the precincts of the royal palace through the horses’ entrance. There they executed her.
2CH 23:16 Jehoiada then drew up a covenant stipulating that he, all the people, and the king should be loyal to the Lord.
2CH 23:17 All the people went and demolished the temple of Baal. They smashed its altars and idols. They killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars.
2CH 23:18 Jehoiada then assigned the duties of the Lord’s temple to the priests, the Levites whom David had assigned to the Lord’s temple. They were responsible for offering burnt sacrifices to the Lord with joy and music, according to the law of Moses and the edict of David.
2CH 23:19 He posted guards at the gates of the Lord’s temple, so no one who was ceremonially unclean in any way could enter.
2CH 23:20 He summoned the officers of the units of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of land, and he then led the king down from the Lord’s temple. They entered the royal palace through the Upper Gate and seated the king on the royal throne.
2CH 23:21 All the people of the land celebrated, for the city had rest now that they had killed Athaliah.
2CH 24:1 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign. He reigned for forty years in Jerusalem. His mother was Zibiah, who was from Beer Sheba.
2CH 24:2 Joash did what the Lord approved throughout the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest.
2CH 24:3 Jehoiada chose two wives for him who gave him sons and daughters.
2CH 24:4 Joash was determined to repair the Lord’s temple.
2CH 24:5 He assembled the priests and Levites and ordered them, “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect the annual quota of silver from all Israel for repairs on the temple of your God. Be quick about it!” But the Levites delayed.
2CH 24:6 So the king summoned Jehoiada the chief priest, and said to him, “Why have you not made the Levites collect from Judah and Jerusalem the tax authorized by Moses the Lord’s servant and by the assembly of Israel at the tent containing the tablets of the law?”
2CH 24:7 (Wicked Athaliah and her sons had broken into God’s temple and used all the holy items of the Lord’s temple in their worship of the Baals.)
2CH 24:8 The king ordered a chest to be made and placed outside the gate of the Lord’s temple.
2CH 24:9 An edict was sent throughout Judah and Jerusalem requiring the people to bring to the Lord the tax that Moses, God’s servant, imposed on Israel in the wilderness.
2CH 24:10 All the officials and all the people gladly brought their silver and threw it into the chest until it was full.
2CH 24:11 Whenever the Levites brought the chest to the royal accountant and they saw there was a lot of silver, the royal scribe and the accountant of the high priest emptied the chest and then took it back to its place. They went through this routine every day and collected a large amount of silver.
2CH 24:12 The king and Jehoiada gave it to the construction foremen assigned to the Lord’s temple. They hired carpenters and craftsmen to repair the Lord’s temple, as well as those skilled in working with iron and bronze to restore the Lord’s temple.
2CH 24:13 They worked hard and made the repairs. They followed the measurements specified for God’s temple and restored it.
2CH 24:14 When they were finished, they brought the rest of the silver to the king and Jehoiada. They used it to make items for the Lord’s temple, including items used in the temple service and for burnt sacrifices, pans, and various other gold and silver items. Throughout Jehoiada’s lifetime, burnt sacrifices were offered regularly in the Lord’s temple.
2CH 24:15 Jehoiada grew old and died at the age of 130.
2CH 24:16 He was buried in the City of David with the kings, because he had accomplished good in Israel and for God and his temple.
2CH 24:17 After Jehoiada died, the officials of Judah visited the king and declared their loyalty to him. The king listened to their advice.
2CH 24:18 They abandoned the temple of the Lord God of their ancestors, and worshiped the Asherah poles and idols. Because of this sinful activity, God was angry with Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH 24:19 The Lord sent prophets among them to lead them back to him. They warned the people, but they would not pay attention.
2CH 24:20 God’s Spirit energized Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest. He stood up before the people and said to them, “This is what God says: ‘Why are you violating the commands of the Lord? You will not be prosperous! Because you have rejected the Lord, he has rejected you!’”
2CH 24:21 They plotted against him and by royal decree stoned him to death in the courtyard of the Lord’s temple.
2CH 24:22 King Joash disregarded the loyalty his father Jehoiada had shown him and killed Jehoiada’s son. As Zechariah was dying, he said, “May the Lord take notice and seek vengeance!”
2CH 24:23 At the beginning of the year the Syrian army attacked Joash and invaded Judah and Jerusalem. They wiped out all the leaders of the people and sent all the plunder they gathered to the king of Damascus.
2CH 24:24 Even though the invading Syrian army was relatively weak, the Lord handed over to them Judah’s very large army, for the people of Judah had abandoned the Lord God of their ancestors. The Syrians gave Joash what he deserved.
2CH 24:25 When they withdrew, they left Joash badly wounded. His servants plotted against him because of what he had done to the son of Jehoiada the priest. They murdered him on his bed. Thus he died and was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.
2CH 24:26 The conspirators were Zabad son of Shimeath (an Ammonite woman) and Jehozabad son of Shimrith (a Moabite woman).
2CH 24:27 The list of Joash’s sons, the many prophetic oracles pertaining to him, and the account of his building project on God’s temple are included in the record of the Scroll of the Kings. His son Amaziah replaced him as king.
2CH 25:1 Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother was Jehoaddan, who was from Jerusalem.
2CH 25:2 He did what the Lord approved, but not with wholehearted devotion.
2CH 25:3 When he had secured control of the kingdom, he executed the servants who had assassinated his father.
2CH 25:4 However, he did not execute their sons. He obeyed the Lord’s commandment as recorded in the law scroll of Moses, “Fathers must not be executed for what their sons do, and sons must not be executed for what their fathers do. A man must be executed only for his own sin.”
2CH 25:5 Amaziah assembled the people of Judah and assigned them by families to the commanders of units of a thousand and the commanders of units of a hundred for all Judah and Benjamin. He counted those twenty years old and up and discovered there were 300,000 young men of fighting age equipped with spears and shields.
2CH 25:6 He hired 100,000 Israelite warriors for a hundred talents of silver.
2CH 25:7 But a prophet visited him and said: “O king, the Israelite troops must not go with you, for the Lord is not with Israel or any of the Ephraimites.
2CH 25:8 Even if you go and fight bravely in battle, God will defeat you before the enemy. God is capable of helping or defeating.”
2CH 25:9 Amaziah asked the prophet: “But what should I do about the hundred talents of silver I paid the Israelite troops?” The prophet replied, “The Lord is capable of giving you more than that.”
2CH 25:10 So Amaziah dismissed the troops that had come to him from Ephraim and sent them home. They were very angry at Judah and returned home incensed.
2CH 25:11 Amaziah boldly led his army to the Valley of Salt, where he defeated 10,000 Edomites.
2CH 25:12 The men of Judah captured 10,000 men alive. They took them to the top of a cliff and threw them over. All the captives fell to their death.
2CH 25:13 Now the troops Amaziah had dismissed and had not allowed to fight in the battle raided the cities of Judah from Samaria to Beth Horon. They killed 3,000 people and carried off a large amount of plunder.
2CH 25:14 When Amaziah returned from defeating the Edomites, he brought back the gods of the people of Seir and made them his personal gods. He bowed down before them and offered them sacrifices.
2CH 25:15 The Lord was angry at Amaziah and sent a prophet to him, who said, “Why are you following these gods that could not deliver their own people from your power?”
2CH 25:16 While he was speaking, Amaziah said to him, “Did we appoint you to be a royal counselor? Stop prophesying or else you will be killed!” So the prophet stopped, but added, “I know that the Lord has decided to destroy you, because you have done this thing and refused to listen to my advice.”
2CH 25:17 After King Amaziah of Judah consulted with his advisers, he sent this message to the king of Israel, Joash son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, “Come, face me on the battlefield.”
2CH 25:18 King Joash of Israel sent this message back to King Amaziah of Judah, “A thorn bush in Lebanon sent this message to a cedar in Lebanon, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ Then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and trampled down the thorn bush.
2CH 25:19 You defeated Edom and it has gone to your head. Gloat over your success, but stay in your palace. Why bring calamity on yourself? Why bring down yourself and Judah along with you?”
2CH 25:20 But Amaziah did not heed the warning, for God wanted to hand them over to Joash because they followed the gods of Edom.
2CH 25:21 So King Joash of Israel attacked. He and King Amaziah of Judah faced each other on the battlefield in Beth Shemesh of Judah.
2CH 25:22 Judah was defeated by Israel, and each man ran back home.
2CH 25:23 King Joash of Israel captured King Amaziah of Judah, son of Joash son of Jehoahaz, in Beth Shemesh and brought him to Jerusalem. He broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Ephraim to the Corner Gate – a distance of about six hundred feet.
2CH 25:24 He took away all the gold and silver, all the items found in God’s temple that were in the care of Obed-Edom, the riches in the royal palace, and some hostages. Then he went back to Samaria.
2CH 25:25 King Amaziah son of Joash of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Joash son of Jehoahaz of Israel.
2CH 25:26 The rest of the events of Amaziah’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH 25:27 From the time Amaziah turned from following the Lord, conspirators plotted against him in Jerusalem, so he fled to Lachish. But they sent assassins after him and they killed him there.
2CH 25:28 His body was carried back by horses, and he was buried in Jerusalem with his ancestors in the City of David.
2CH 26:1 All the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in his father Amaziah’s place.
2CH 26:2 Uzziah built up Elat and restored it to Judah after King Amaziah had passed away.
2CH 26:3 Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecholiah, who was from Jerusalem.
2CH 26:4 He did what the Lord approved, just as his father Amaziah had done.
2CH 26:5 He followed God during the lifetime of Zechariah, who taught him how to honor God. As long as he followed the Lord, God caused him to succeed.
2CH 26:6 Uzziah attacked the Philistines and broke down the walls of Gath, Jabneh, and Ashdod. He built cities in the region of Ashdod and throughout Philistine territory.
2CH 26:7 God helped him in his campaigns against the Philistines, the Arabs living in Gur Baal, and the Meunites.
2CH 26:8 The Ammonites paid tribute to Uzziah and his fame reached the border of Egypt, for he grew in power.
2CH 26:9 Uzziah built and fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, Valley Gate, and at the Angle.
2CH 26:10 He built towers in the desert and dug many cisterns, for he owned many herds in the lowlands and on the plain. He had workers in the fields and vineyards in the hills and in Carmel, for he loved agriculture.
2CH 26:11 Uzziah had an army of skilled warriors trained for battle. They were organized by divisions according to the muster rolls made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer under the authority of Hananiah, a royal official.
2CH 26:12 The total number of family leaders who led warriors was 2,600.
2CH 26:13 They commanded an army of 307,500 skilled and able warriors who were ready to defend the king against his enemies.
2CH 26:14 Uzziah supplied shields, spears, helmets, breastplates, bows, and slingstones for the entire army.
2CH 26:15 In Jerusalem he made war machines carefully designed to shoot arrows and large stones from the towers and corners of the walls. He became very famous, for he received tremendous support and became powerful.
2CH 26:16 But once he became powerful, his pride destroyed him. He disobeyed the Lord his God. He entered the Lord’s temple to offer incense on the incense altar.
2CH 26:17 Azariah the priest and eighty other brave priests of the Lord followed him in.
2CH 26:18 They confronted King Uzziah and said to him, “It is not proper for you, Uzziah, to offer incense to the Lord. That is the responsibility of the priests, the descendants of Aaron, who are consecrated to offer incense. Leave the sanctuary, for you have disobeyed and the Lord God will not honor you!”
2CH 26:19 Uzziah, who had an incense censer in his hand, became angry. While he was ranting and raving at the priests, a skin disease appeared on his forehead right there in front of the priests in the Lord’s temple near the incense altar.
2CH 26:20 When Azariah the high priest and the other priests looked at him, there was a skin disease on his forehead. They hurried him out of there; even the king himself wanted to leave quickly because the Lord had afflicted him.
2CH 26:21 King Uzziah suffered from a skin disease until the day he died. He lived in separate quarters, afflicted by a skin disease and banned from the Lord’s temple. His son Jotham was in charge of the palace and ruled over the people of the land.
2CH 26:22 The rest of the events of Uzziah’s reign, from start to finish, were recorded by the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz.
2CH 26:23 Uzziah passed away and was buried near his ancestors in a cemetery belonging to the kings. (This was because he had a skin disease.) His son Jotham replaced him as king.
2CH 27:1 Jotham was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
2CH 27:2 He did what the Lord approved, just as his father Uzziah had done. (He did not, however, have the audacity to enter the temple.) Yet the people were still sinning.
2CH 27:3 He built the Upper Gate to the Lord’s temple and did a lot of work on the wall in the area known as Ophel.
2CH 27:4 He built cities in the hill country of Judah and fortresses and towers in the forests.
2CH 27:5 He launched a military campaign against the king of the Ammonites and defeated them. That year the Ammonites paid him 100 talents of silver, 10,000 kors of wheat, and 10,000 kors of barley. The Ammonites also paid this same amount of annual tribute the next two years.
2CH 27:6 Jotham grew powerful because he was determined to please the Lord his God.
2CH 27:7 The rest of the events of Jotham’s reign, including all his military campaigns and his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll of the kings of Israel and Judah.
2CH 27:8 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem.
2CH 27:9 Jotham passed away and was buried in the City of David. His son Ahaz replaced him as king.
2CH 28:1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what pleased the Lord, in contrast to his ancestor David.
2CH 28:2 He followed in the footsteps of the kings of Israel; he also made images of the Baals.
2CH 28:3 He offered sacrifices in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom and passed his sons through the fire, a horrible sin practiced by the nations whom the Lord drove out before the Israelites.
2CH 28:4 He offered sacrifices and burned incense on the high places, on the hills, and under every green tree.
2CH 28:5 The Lord his God handed him over to the king of Syria. The Syrians defeated him and deported many captives to Damascus. He was also handed over to the king of Israel, who thoroughly defeated him.
2CH 28:6 In one day King Pekah son of Remaliah of Israel killed 120,000 warriors in Judah, because they had abandoned the Lord God of their ancestors.
2CH 28:7 Zikri, an Ephraimite warrior, killed the king’s son Maaseiah, Azrikam, the supervisor of the palace, and Elkanah, the king’s second-in-command.
2CH 28:8 The Israelites seized from their brothers 200,000 wives, sons, and daughters. They also carried off a huge amount of plunder and took it back to Samaria.
2CH 28:9 Oded, a prophet of the Lord, was there. He went to meet the army as they arrived in Samaria and said to them: “Look, because the Lord God of your ancestors was angry with Judah he handed them over to you. You have killed them so mercilessly that God has taken notice.
2CH 28:10 And now you are planning to enslave the people of Judah and Jerusalem. Yet are you not also guilty before the Lord your God?
2CH 28:11 Now listen to me! Send back those you have seized from your brothers, for the Lord is very angry at you!”
2CH 28:12 So some of the Ephraimite family leaders, Azariah son of Jehochanan, Berechiah son of Meshillemoth, Jechizkiah son of Shallum, and Amasa son of Hadlai confronted those returning from the battle.
2CH 28:13 They said to them, “Don’t bring those captives here! Are you planning on making us even more sinful and guilty before the Lord? Our guilt is already great and the Lord is very angry at Israel.”
2CH 28:14 So the soldiers released the captives and the plunder before the officials and the entire assembly.
2CH 28:15 Men were assigned to take the prisoners and find clothes among the plunder for those who were naked. So they clothed them, supplied them with sandals, gave them food and drink, and provided them with oil to rub on their skin. They put the ones who couldn’t walk on donkeys. They brought them back to their brothers at Jericho, the city of the date palm trees, and then returned to Samaria.
2CH 28:16 At that time King Ahaz asked the king of Assyria for help.
2CH 28:17 The Edomites had again invaded and defeated Judah and carried off captives.
2CH 28:18 The Philistines had raided the cities of Judah in the lowlands and the Negev. They captured and settled in Beth Shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Soco and its surrounding villages, Timnah and its surrounding villages, and Gimzo and its surrounding villages.
2CH 28:19 The Lord humiliated Judah because of King Ahaz of Israel, for he encouraged Judah to sin and was very unfaithful to the Lord.
2CH 28:20 King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria came, but he gave him more trouble than support.
2CH 28:21 Ahaz gathered riches from the Lord’s temple, the royal palace, and the officials and gave them to the king of Assyria, but that did not help.
2CH 28:22 During his time of trouble King Ahaz was even more unfaithful to the Lord.
2CH 28:23 He offered sacrifices to the gods of Damascus whom he thought had defeated him. He reasoned, “Since the gods of the kings of Damascus helped them, I will sacrifice to them so they will help me.” But they caused him and all Israel to stumble.
2CH 28:24 Ahaz gathered the items in God’s temple and removed them. He shut the doors of the Lord’s temple and erected altars on every street corner in Jerusalem.
2CH 28:25 In every city throughout Judah he set up high places to offer sacrifices to other gods. He angered the Lord God of his ancestors.
2CH 28:26 The rest of the events of Ahaz’s reign, including his accomplishments from start to finish, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH 28:27 Ahaz passed away and was buried in the City of David; they did not bring him to the tombs of the kings of Israel. His son Hezekiah replaced him as king.
2CH 29:1 Hezekiah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.
2CH 29:2 He did what the Lord approved, just as his ancestor David had done.
2CH 29:3 In the first month of the first year of his reign, he opened the doors of the Lord’s temple and repaired them.
2CH 29:4 He brought in the priests and Levites and assembled them in the square on the east side.
2CH 29:5 He said to them: “Listen to me, you Levites! Now consecrate yourselves, so you can consecrate the temple of the Lord God of your ancestors! Remove from the sanctuary what is ceremonially unclean!
2CH 29:6 For our fathers were unfaithful; they did what is evil in the sight of the Lord our God and abandoned him! They turned away from the Lord’s dwelling place and rejected him.
2CH 29:7 They closed the doors of the temple porch and put out the lamps; they did not offer incense or burnt sacrifices in the sanctuary of the God of Israel.
2CH 29:8 The Lord was angry at Judah and Jerusalem and made them an appalling object of horror at which people hiss out their scorn, as you can see with your own eyes.
2CH 29:9 Look, our fathers died violently and our sons, daughters, and wives were carried off because of this.
2CH 29:10 Now I intend to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, so that he may relent from his raging anger.
2CH 29:11 My sons, do not be negligent now, for the Lord has chosen you to serve in his presence and offer sacrifices.”
2CH 29:12 The following Levites prepared to carry out the king’s orders: From the Kohathites: Mahath son of Amasai and Joel son of Azariah; from the Merarites: Kish son of Abdi and Azariah son of Jehallelel; from the Gershonites: Joah son of Zimmah and Eden son of Joah;
2CH 29:13 from the descendants of Elizaphan: Shimri and Jeiel; from the descendants of Asaph: Zechariah and Mattaniah;
2CH 29:14 from the descendants of Heman: Jehiel and Shimei; from the descendants of Jeduthun: Shemaiah and Uzziel.
2CH 29:15 They assembled their brothers and consecrated themselves. Then they went in to purify the Lord’s temple, just as the king had ordered, in accordance with the word of the Lord.
2CH 29:16 The priests then entered the Lord’s temple to purify it; they brought out to the courtyard of the Lord’s temple every ceremonially unclean thing they discovered inside. The Levites took them out to the Kidron Valley.
2CH 29:17 On the first day of the first month they began consecrating; by the eighth day of the month they reached the porch of the Lord’s temple. For eight more days they consecrated the Lord’s temple. On the sixteenth day of the first month they were finished.
2CH 29:18 They went to King Hezekiah and said: “We have purified the entire temple of the Lord, including the altar of burnt sacrifice and all its equipment, and the table for the Bread of the Presence and all its equipment.
2CH 29:19 We have prepared and consecrated all the items that King Ahaz removed during his reign when he acted unfaithfully. They are in front of the altar of the Lord.”
2CH 29:20 Early the next morning King Hezekiah assembled the city officials and went up to the Lord’s temple.
2CH 29:21 They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven goats as a sin offering for the kingdom, the sanctuary, and Judah. The king told the priests, the descendants of Aaron, to offer burnt sacrifices on the altar of the Lord.
2CH 29:22 They slaughtered the bulls, and the priests took the blood and splashed it on the altar. Then they slaughtered the rams and splashed the blood on the altar; next they slaughtered the lambs and splashed the blood on the altar.
2CH 29:23 Finally they brought the goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly, and they placed their hands on them.
2CH 29:24 Then the priests slaughtered them. They offered their blood as a sin offering on the altar to make atonement for all Israel, because the king had decreed that the burnt sacrifice and sin offering were for all Israel.
2CH 29:25 King Hezekiah stationed the Levites in the Lord’s temple with cymbals and stringed instruments, just as David, Gad the king’s prophet, and Nathan the prophet had ordered. (The Lord had actually given these orders through his prophets.)
2CH 29:26 The Levites had David’s musical instruments and the priests had trumpets.
2CH 29:27 Hezekiah ordered the burnt sacrifice to be offered on the altar. As they began to offer the sacrifice, they also began to sing to the Lord, accompanied by the trumpets and the musical instruments of King David of Israel.
2CH 29:28 The entire assembly worshiped, as the singers sang and the trumpeters played. They continued until the burnt sacrifice was completed.
2CH 29:29 When the sacrifices were completed, the king and all who were with him bowed down and worshiped.
2CH 29:30 King Hezekiah and the officials told the Levites to praise the Lord, using the psalms of David and Asaph the prophet. So they joyfully offered praise and bowed down and worshiped.
2CH 29:31 Hezekiah said, “Now you have consecrated yourselves to the Lord. Come and bring sacrifices and thank offerings to the Lord’s temple.” So the assembly brought sacrifices and thank offerings, and whoever desired to do so brought burnt sacrifices.
2CH 29:32 The assembly brought a total of 70 bulls, 100 rams, and 200 lambs as burnt sacrifices to the Lord,
2CH 29:33 and 600 bulls and 3,000 sheep were consecrated.
2CH 29:34 But there were not enough priests to skin all the animals, so their brothers, the Levites, helped them until the work was finished and the priests could consecrate themselves. (The Levites had been more conscientious about consecrating themselves than the priests.)
2CH 29:35 There was a large number of burnt sacrifices, as well as fat from the peace offerings and drink offerings that accompanied the burnt sacrifices. So the service of the Lord’s temple was reinstituted.
2CH 29:36 Hezekiah and all the people were happy about what God had done for them, for it had been done quickly.
2CH 30:1 Hezekiah sent messages throughout Israel and Judah; he even wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasseh, summoning them to come to the Lord’s temple in Jerusalem and observe a Passover celebration for the Lord God of Israel.
2CH 30:2 The king, his officials, and the entire assembly in Jerusalem decided to observe the Passover in the second month.
2CH 30:3 They were unable to observe it at the regular time because not enough priests had consecrated themselves and the people had not assembled in Jerusalem.
2CH 30:4 The proposal seemed appropriate to the king and the entire assembly.
2CH 30:5 So they sent an edict throughout Israel from Beer Sheba to Dan, summoning the people to come and observe a Passover for the Lord God of Israel in Jerusalem, for they had not observed it on a nationwide scale as prescribed in the law.
2CH 30:6 Messengers delivered the letters from the king and his officials throughout Israel and Judah. This royal edict read: “O Israelites, return to the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so he may return to you who have been spared from the kings of Assyria.
2CH 30:7 Don’t be like your fathers and brothers who were unfaithful to the Lord God of their ancestors, provoking him to destroy them, as you can see.
2CH 30:8 Now, don’t be stubborn like your fathers! Submit to the Lord and come to his sanctuary which he has permanently consecrated. Serve the Lord your God so that he might relent from his raging anger.
2CH 30:9 For if you return to the Lord, your brothers and sons will be shown mercy by their captors and return to this land. The Lord your God is merciful and compassionate; he will not reject you if you return to him.”
2CH 30:10 The messengers journeyed from city to city through the land of Ephraim and Manasseh as far as Zebulun, but people mocked and ridiculed them.
2CH 30:11 But some men from Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem.
2CH 30:12 In Judah God moved the people to unite and carry out the edict the king and the officers had issued at the Lord’s command.
2CH 30:13 A huge crowd assembled in Jerusalem to observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread in the second month.
2CH 30:14 They removed the altars in Jerusalem; they also removed all the incense altars and threw them into the Kidron Valley.
2CH 30:15 They slaughtered the Passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the second month. The priests and Levites were ashamed, so they consecrated themselves and brought burnt sacrifices to the Lord’s temple.
2CH 30:16 They stood at their posts according to the regulations outlined in the law of Moses, the man of God. The priests were splashing the blood as the Levites handed it to them.
2CH 30:17 Because many in the assembly had not consecrated themselves, the Levites slaughtered the Passover lambs of all who were ceremonially unclean and could not consecrate their sacrifice to the Lord.
2CH 30:18 The majority of the many people from Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun were ceremonially unclean, yet they ate the Passover in violation of what is prescribed in the law. For Hezekiah prayed for them, saying: “May the Lord, who is good, forgive
2CH 30:19 everyone who has determined to follow God, the Lord God of his ancestors, even if he is not ceremonially clean according to the standards of the temple.”
2CH 30:20 The Lord responded favorably to Hezekiah and forgave the people.
2CH 30:21 The Israelites who were in Jerusalem observed the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days with great joy. The Levites and priests were praising the Lord every day with all their might.
2CH 30:22 Hezekiah expressed his appreciation to all the Levites, who demonstrated great skill in serving the Lord. They feasted for the seven days of the festival, and were making peace offerings and giving thanks to the Lord God of their ancestors.
2CH 30:23 The entire assembly then decided to celebrate for seven more days; so they joyfully celebrated for seven more days.
2CH 30:24 King Hezekiah of Judah supplied 1,000 bulls and 7,000 sheep for the assembly, while the officials supplied them with 1,000 bulls and 10,000 sheep. Many priests consecrated themselves.
2CH 30:25 The celebration included the entire assembly of Judah, the priests, the Levites, the entire assembly of those who came from Israel, the resident foreigners who came from the land of Israel, and the residents of Judah.
2CH 30:26 There was a great celebration in Jerusalem, unlike anything that had occurred in Jerusalem since the time of King Solomon son of David of Israel.
2CH 30:27 The priests and Levites got up and pronounced blessings on the people. The Lord responded favorably to them as their prayers reached his holy dwelling place in heaven.
2CH 31:1 When all this was over, the Israelites who were in the cities of Judah went out and smashed the sacred pillars, cut down the Asherah poles, and demolished all the high places and altars throughout Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh. Then all the Israelites returned to their own homes in their cities.
2CH 31:2 Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and Levites to do their assigned tasks – to offer burnt sacrifices and present offerings and to serve, give thanks, and offer praise in the gates of the Lord’s sanctuary.
2CH 31:3 The king contributed some of what he owned for burnt sacrifices, including the morning and evening burnt sacrifices and the burnt sacrifices made on Sabbaths, new moon festivals, and at other appointed times prescribed in the law of the Lord.
2CH 31:4 He ordered the people living in Jerusalem to contribute the portion prescribed for the priests and Levites so they might be obedient to the law of the Lord.
2CH 31:5 When the edict was issued, the Israelites freely contributed the initial portion of their grain, wine, olive oil, honey, and all the produce of their fields. They brought a tenth of everything, which added up to a huge amount.
2CH 31:6 The Israelites and people of Judah who lived in the cities of Judah also contributed a tenth of their cattle and sheep, as well as a tenth of the holy items consecrated to the Lord their God. They brought them and placed them in many heaps.
2CH 31:7 In the third month they began piling their contributions in heaps and finished in the seventh month.
2CH 31:8 When Hezekiah and the officials came and saw the heaps, they praised the Lord and pronounced blessings on his people Israel.
2CH 31:9 When Hezekiah asked the priests and Levites about the heaps,
2CH 31:10 Azariah, the head priest from the family of Zadok, said to him, “Since the contributions began arriving in the Lord’s temple, we have had plenty to eat and have a large quantity left over. For the Lord has blessed his people, and this large amount remains.”
2CH 31:11 Hezekiah ordered that storerooms be prepared in the Lord’s temple. When this was done,
2CH 31:12 they brought in the contributions, tithes, and consecrated items that had been offered. Konaniah, a Levite, was in charge of all this, assisted by his brother Shimei.
2CH 31:13 Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismakiah, Mahath, and Benaiah worked under the supervision of Konaniah and his brother Shimei, as directed by King Hezekiah and Azariah, the supervisor of God’s temple.
2CH 31:14 Kore son of Imnah, a Levite and the guard on the east side, was in charge of the voluntary offerings made to God and disbursed the contributions made to the Lord and the consecrated items.
2CH 31:15 In the cities of the priests, Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah faithfully assisted him in making disbursements to their fellow priests according to their divisions, regardless of age.
2CH 31:16 They made disbursements to all the males three years old and up who were listed in the genealogical records – to all who would enter the Lord’s temple to serve on a daily basis and fulfill their duties as assigned to their divisions.
2CH 31:17 They made disbursements to the priests listed in the genealogical records by their families, and to the Levites twenty years old and up, according to their duties as assigned to their divisions,
2CH 31:18 and to all the infants, wives, sons, and daughters of the entire assembly listed in the genealogical records, for they faithfully consecrated themselves.
2CH 31:19 As for the descendants of Aaron, the priests who lived in the outskirts of all their cities, men were assigned to disburse portions to every male among the priests and to every Levite listed in the genealogical records.
2CH 31:20 This is what Hezekiah did throughout Judah. He did what the Lord his God considered good and right and faithful.
2CH 31:21 He wholeheartedly and successfully reinstituted service in God’s temple and obedience to the law, in order to follow his God.
2CH 32:1 After these faithful deeds were accomplished, King Sennacherib of Assyria invaded Judah. He besieged the fortified cities, intending to seize them.
2CH 32:2 When Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had invaded and intended to attack Jerusalem,
2CH 32:3 he consulted with his advisers and military officers about stopping up the springs outside the city, and they supported him.
2CH 32:4 A large number of people gathered together and stopped up all the springs and the stream that flowed through the district. They reasoned, “Why should the kings of Assyria come and find plenty of water?”
2CH 32:5 Hezekiah energetically rebuilt every broken wall. He erected towers and an outer wall, and fortified the terrace of the City of David. He made many weapons and shields.
2CH 32:6 He appointed military officers over the army and assembled them in the square at the city gate. He encouraged them, saying,
2CH 32:7 “Be strong and brave! Don’t be afraid and don’t panic because of the king of Assyria and this huge army that is with him! We have with us one who is stronger than those who are with him.
2CH 32:8 He has with him mere human strength, but the Lord our God is with us to help us and fight our battles!” The army was encouraged by the words of King Hezekiah of Judah.
2CH 32:9 Afterward King Sennacherib of Assyria, while attacking Lachish with all his military might, sent his messengers to Jerusalem. The message was for King Hezekiah of Judah and all the people of Judah who were in Jerusalem. It read:
2CH 32:10 “This is what King Sennacherib of Assyria says: ‘Why are you so confident that you remain in Jerusalem while it is under siege?
2CH 32:11 Hezekiah says, “The Lord our God will rescue us from the power of the king of Assyria.” But he is misleading you and you will die of hunger and thirst!
2CH 32:12 Hezekiah is the one who eliminated the Lord’s high places and altars and then told Judah and Jerusalem, “At one altar you must worship and offer sacrifices.”
2CH 32:13 Are you not aware of what I and my predecessors have done to all the nations of the surrounding lands? Have the gods of the surrounding lands actually been able to rescue their lands from my power?
2CH 32:14 Who among all the gods of these nations whom my predecessors annihilated was able to rescue his people from my power?
2CH 32:15 Now don’t let Hezekiah deceive you or mislead you like this. Don’t believe him, for no god of any nation or kingdom has been able to rescue his people from my power or the power of my predecessors. So how can your gods rescue you from my power?’”
2CH 32:16 Sennacherib’s servants further insulted the Lord God and his servant Hezekiah.
2CH 32:17 He wrote letters mocking the Lord God of Israel and insulting him with these words: “The gods of the surrounding nations could not rescue their people from my power. Neither can Hezekiah’s god rescue his people from my power.”
2CH 32:18 They called out loudly in the Judahite dialect to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, trying to scare and terrify them so they could seize the city.
2CH 32:19 They talked about the God of Jerusalem as if he were one of the man-made gods of the nations of the earth.
2CH 32:20 King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz prayed about this and cried out to heaven.
2CH 32:21 The Lord sent a messenger and he wiped out all the soldiers, princes, and officers in the army of the king of Assyria. So Sennacherib returned home humiliated. When he entered the temple of his god, some of his own sons struck him down with the sword.
2CH 32:22 The Lord delivered Hezekiah and the residents of Jerusalem from the power of King Sennacherib of Assyria and from all the other nations. He made them secure on every side.
2CH 32:23 Many were bringing presents to the Lord in Jerusalem and precious gifts to King Hezekiah of Judah. From that time on he was respected by all the nations.
2CH 32:24 In those days Hezekiah was stricken with a terminal illness. He prayed to the Lord, who answered him and gave him a sign confirming that he would be healed.
2CH 32:25 But Hezekiah was ungrateful; he had a proud attitude, provoking God to be angry at him, as well as Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH 32:26 But then Hezekiah and the residents of Jerusalem humbled themselves and abandoned their pride, and the Lord was not angry with them for the rest of Hezekiah’s reign.
2CH 32:27 Hezekiah was very wealthy and greatly respected. He made storehouses for his silver, gold, precious stones, spices, and all his other valuable possessions.
2CH 32:28 He made storerooms for the harvest of grain, wine, and olive oil, and stalls for all his various kinds of livestock and his flocks.
2CH 32:29 He built royal cities and owned a large number of sheep and cattle, for God gave him a huge amount of possessions.
2CH 32:30 Hezekiah dammed up the source of the waters of the Upper Gihon and directed them down to the west side of the City of David. Hezekiah succeeded in all that he did.
2CH 32:31 So when the envoys arrived from the Babylonian officials to visit him and inquire about the sign that occurred in the land, God left him alone to test him, in order to know his true motives.
2CH 32:32 The rest of the events of Hezekiah’s reign, including his faithful deeds, are recorded in the vision of the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz, included in the Scroll of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH 32:33 Hezekiah passed away and was buried on the ascent of the tombs of the descendants of David. All the people of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem buried him with great honor. His son Manasseh replaced him as king.
2CH 33:1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned for fifty-five years in Jerusalem.
2CH 33:2 He did evil in the sight of the Lord and committed the same horrible sins practiced by the nations whom the Lord drove out ahead of the Israelites.
2CH 33:3 He rebuilt the high places that his father Hezekiah had destroyed; he set up altars for the Baals and made Asherah poles. He bowed down to all the stars in the sky and worshiped them.
2CH 33:4 He built altars in the Lord’s temple, about which the Lord had said, “Jerusalem will be my permanent home.”
2CH 33:5 In the two courtyards of the Lord’s temple he built altars for all the stars in the sky.
2CH 33:6 He passed his sons through the fire in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom and practiced divination, omen reading, and sorcery. He set up a ritual pit to conjure up underworld spirits and appointed magicians to supervise it. He did a great amount of evil in the sight of the Lord and angered him.
2CH 33:7 He put an idolatrous image he had made in God’s temple, about which God had said to David and to his son Solomon, “This temple in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will be my permanent home.
2CH 33:8 I will not make Israel again leave the land I gave to their ancestors, provided that they carefully obey all I commanded them, the whole law, the rules and regulations given to Moses.”
2CH 33:9 But Manasseh misled the people of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem so that they sinned more than the nations whom the Lord had destroyed ahead of the Israelites.
2CH 33:10 The Lord confronted Manasseh and his people, but they paid no attention.
2CH 33:11 So the Lord brought against them the commanders of the army of the king of Assyria. They seized Manasseh, put hooks in his nose, bound him with bronze chains, and carried him away to Babylon.
2CH 33:12 In his pain Manasseh asked the Lord his God for mercy and truly humbled himself before the God of his ancestors.
2CH 33:13 When he prayed to the Lord, the Lord responded to him and answered favorably his cry for mercy. The Lord brought him back to Jerusalem to his kingdom. Then Manasseh realized that the Lord is the true God.
2CH 33:14 After this Manasseh built up the outer wall of the City of David on the west side of the Gihon in the valley to the entrance of the Fish Gate and all around the terrace; he made it much higher. He placed army officers in all the fortified cities in Judah.
2CH 33:15 He removed the foreign gods and images from the Lord’s temple and all the altars he had built on the hill of the Lord’s temple and in Jerusalem; he threw them outside the city.
2CH 33:16 He erected the altar of the Lord and offered on it peace offerings and thank offerings. He told the people of Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel.
2CH 33:17 The people continued to offer sacrifices at the high places, but only to the Lord their God.
2CH 33:18 The rest of the events of Manasseh’s reign, including his prayer to his God and the words the prophets spoke to him in the name of the Lord God of Israel, are recorded in the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
2CH 33:19 The Annals of the Prophets include his prayer, give an account of how the Lord responded to it, record all his sins and unfaithful acts, and identify the sites where he built high places and erected Asherah poles and idols before he humbled himself.
2CH 33:20 Manasseh passed away and was buried in his palace. His son Amon replaced him as king.
2CH 33:21 Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem.
2CH 33:22 He did evil in the sight of the Lord, just like his father Manasseh had done. He offered sacrifices to all the idols his father Manasseh had made, and worshiped them.
2CH 33:23 He did not humble himself before the Lord as his father Manasseh had done. Amon was guilty of great sin.
2CH 33:24 His servants conspired against him and killed him in his palace.
2CH 33:25 The people of the land executed all who had conspired against King Amon, and they made his son Josiah king in his place.
2CH 34:1 Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for thirty-one years in Jerusalem.
2CH 34:2 He did what the Lord approved and followed in his ancestor David’s footsteps; he did not deviate to the right or the left.
2CH 34:3 In the eighth year of his reign, while he was still young, he began to seek the God of his ancestor David. In his twelfth year he began ridding Judah and Jerusalem of the high places, Asherah poles, idols, and images.
2CH 34:4 He ordered the altars of the Baals to be torn down, and broke the incense altars that were above them. He smashed the Asherah poles, idols and images, crushed them up and sprinkled the dust over the tombs of those who had sacrificed to them.
2CH 34:5 He burned the bones of the pagan priests on their altars; he purified Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH 34:6 In the cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, and Simeon, as far as Naphtali, and in the ruins around them,
2CH 34:7 he tore down the altars and Asherah poles, demolished the idols, and smashed all the incense altars throughout the land of Israel. Then he returned to Jerusalem.
2CH 34:8 In the eighteenth year of his reign, he continued his policy of purifying the land and the temple. He sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, Maaseiah the city official, and Joah son of Joahaz the secretary to repair the temple of the Lord his God.
2CH 34:9 They went to Hilkiah the high priest and gave him the silver that had been brought to God’s temple. The Levites who guarded the door had collected it from the people of Manasseh and Ephraim and from all who were left in Israel, as well as from all the people of Judah and Benjamin and the residents of Jerusalem.
2CH 34:10 They handed it over to the construction foremen assigned to the Lord’s temple. They in turn paid the temple workers to restore and repair it.
2CH 34:11 They gave money to the craftsmen and builders to buy chiseled stone and wood for the braces and rafters of the buildings that the kings of Judah had allowed to fall into disrepair.
2CH 34:12 The men worked faithfully. Their supervisors were Jahath and Obadiah (Levites descended from Merari), as well as Zechariah and Meshullam (descendants of Kohath). The Levites, all of whom were skilled musicians,
2CH 34:13 supervised the laborers and all the foremen on their various jobs. Some of the Levites were scribes, officials, and guards.
2CH 34:14 When they took out the silver that had been brought to the Lord’s temple, Hilkiah the priest found the law scroll the Lord had given to Moses.
2CH 34:15 Hilkiah informed Shaphan the scribe, “I found the law scroll in the Lord’s temple.” Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan.
2CH 34:16 Shaphan brought the scroll to the king and reported, “Your servants are doing everything assigned to them.
2CH 34:17 They melted down the silver in the Lord’s temple and handed it over to the supervisors of the construction foremen.”
2CH 34:18 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll.” Shaphan read it out loud before the king.
2CH 34:19 When the king heard the words of the law scroll, he tore his clothes.
2CH 34:20 The king ordered Hilkiah, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Abdon son of Micah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s servant,
2CH 34:21 “Go, seek an oracle from the Lord for me and those who remain in Israel and Judah. Find out about the words of this scroll that has been discovered. For the Lord’s fury has been ignited against us, because our ancestors have not obeyed the word of the Lord by doing all that this scroll instructs!”
2CH 34:22 So Hilkiah and the others sent by the king went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, the supervisor of the wardrobe. (She lived in Jerusalem in the Mishneh district.) They stated their business,
2CH 34:23 and she said to them: “This is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘Say this to the man who sent you to me:
2CH 34:24 “This is what the Lord says: ‘I am about to bring disaster on this place and its residents, the details of which are recorded in the scroll which they read before the king of Judah.
2CH 34:25 This will happen because they have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to other gods, angering me with all the idols they have made. My anger will ignite against this place and will not be extinguished!’”
2CH 34:26 Say this to the king of Judah, who sent you to seek an oracle from the Lord: “This is what the Lord God of Israel says concerning the words you have heard:
2CH 34:27 ‘You displayed a sensitive spirit and humbled yourself before God when you heard his words concerning this place and its residents. You humbled yourself before me, tore your clothes and wept before me, and I have heard you,’ says the Lord.
2CH 34:28 ‘Therefore I will allow you to die and be buried in peace. You will not have to witness all the disaster I will bring on this place and its residents.’”’” Then they reported back to the king.
2CH 34:29 The king summoned all the leaders of Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH 34:30 The king went up to the Lord’s temple, accompanied by all the people of Judah, the residents of Jerusalem, the priests, and the Levites. All the people were there, from the oldest to the youngest. He read aloud all the words of the scroll of the covenant that had been discovered in the Lord’s temple.
2CH 34:31 The king stood by his pillar and renewed the covenant before the Lord, agreeing to follow the Lord and to obey his commandments, laws, and rules with all his heart and being, by carrying out the terms of this covenant recorded on this scroll.
2CH 34:32 He made all who were in Jerusalem and Benjamin agree to it. The residents of Jerusalem acted in accordance with the covenant of God, the God of their ancestors.
2CH 34:33 Josiah removed all the detestable idols from all the areas belonging to the Israelites and encouraged all who were in Israel to worship the Lord their God. Throughout the rest of his reign they did not turn aside from following the Lord God of their ancestors.
2CH 35:1 Josiah observed a Passover festival for the Lord in Jerusalem. They slaughtered the Passover lambs on the fourteenth day of the first month.
2CH 35:2 He appointed the priests to fulfill their duties and encouraged them to carry out their service in the Lord’s temple.
2CH 35:3 He told the Levites, who instructed all Israel about things consecrated to the Lord, “Place the holy ark in the temple which King Solomon son of David of Israel built. Don’t carry it on your shoulders. Now serve the Lord your God and his people Israel!
2CH 35:4 Prepare yourselves by your families according to your divisions, as instructed by King David of Israel and his son Solomon.
2CH 35:5 Stand in the sanctuary and, together with the Levites, represent the family divisions of your countrymen.
2CH 35:6 Slaughter the Passover lambs, consecrate yourselves, and make preparations for your countrymen to do what the Lord commanded through Moses.”
2CH 35:7 From his own royal flocks and herds, Josiah supplied the people with 30,000 lambs and goats for the Passover sacrifice, as well as 3,000 cattle.
2CH 35:8 His officials also willingly contributed to the people, priests, and Levites. Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the leaders of God’s temple, supplied 2,600 Passover sacrifices and 300 cattle.
2CH 35:9 Konaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel, along with Hashabiah, Jeiel, and Jozabad, the officials of the Levites, supplied the Levites with 5,000 Passover sacrifices and 500 cattle.
2CH 35:10 Preparations were made, and the priests stood at their posts and the Levites in their divisions as prescribed by the king.
2CH 35:11 They slaughtered the Passover lambs and the priests splashed the blood, while the Levites skinned the animals.
2CH 35:12 They reserved the burnt offerings and the cattle for the family divisions of the people to present to the Lord, as prescribed in the scroll of Moses.
2CH 35:13 They cooked the Passover sacrifices over the open fire as prescribed and cooked the consecrated offerings in pots, kettles, and pans. They quickly served them to all the people.
2CH 35:14 Afterward they made preparations for themselves and for the priests, because the priests, the descendants of Aaron, were offering burnt sacrifices and fat portions until evening. The Levites made preparations for themselves and for the priests, the descendants of Aaron.
2CH 35:15 The musicians, the descendants of Asaph, manned their posts, as prescribed by David, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s prophet. The guards at the various gates did not need to leave their posts, for their fellow Levites made preparations for them.
2CH 35:16 So all the preparations for the Lord’s service were made that day, as the Passover was observed and the burnt sacrifices were offered on the altar of the Lord, as prescribed by King Josiah.
2CH 35:17 So the Israelites who were present observed the Passover at that time, as well as the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days.
2CH 35:18 A Passover like this had not been observed in Israel since the days of Samuel the prophet. None of the kings of Israel had observed a Passover like the one celebrated by Josiah, the priests, the Levites, all the people of Judah and Israel who were there, and the residents of Jerusalem.
2CH 35:19 This Passover was observed in the eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign.
2CH 35:20 After Josiah had done all this for the temple, King Necho of Egypt marched up to do battle at Carchemish on the Euphrates River. Josiah marched out to oppose him.
2CH 35:21 Necho sent messengers to him, saying, “Why are you opposing me, O king of Judah? I am not attacking you today, but the kingdom with which I am at war. God told me to hurry. Stop opposing God, who is with me, or else he will destroy you.”
2CH 35:22 But Josiah did not turn back from him; he disguised himself for battle. He did not take seriously the words of Necho which he had received from God; he went to fight him in the Plain of Megiddo.
2CH 35:23 Archers shot King Josiah; the king ordered his servants, “Take me out of this chariot, for I am seriously wounded.”
2CH 35:24 So his servants took him out of the chariot, put him in another chariot that he owned, and brought him to Jerusalem, where he died. He was buried in the tombs of his ancestors; all the people of Judah and Jerusalem mourned Josiah.
2CH 35:25 Jeremiah composed laments for Josiah which all the male and female singers use to mourn Josiah to this very day. It has become customary in Israel to sing these; they are recorded in the Book of Laments.
2CH 35:26 The rest of the events of Josiah’s reign, including the faithful acts he did in obedience to what is written in the law of the Lord
2CH 35:27 and his accomplishments, from start to finish, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
2CH 36:1 The people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and made him king in his father’s place in Jerusalem.
2CH 36:2 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
2CH 36:3 The king of Egypt prevented him from ruling in Jerusalem and imposed on the land a special tax of one hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
2CH 36:4 The king of Egypt made Jehoahaz’s brother Eliakim king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. Necho seized his brother Jehoahaz and took him to Egypt.
2CH 36:5 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem. He did evil in the sight of the Lord his God.
2CH 36:6 King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon attacked him, bound him with bronze chains, and carried him away to Babylon.
2CH 36:7 Nebuchadnezzar took some of the items in the Lord’s temple to Babylon and put them in his palace there.
2CH 36:8 The rest of the events of Jehoiakim’s reign, including the horrible sins he committed and his shortcomings, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Israel and Judah. His son Jehoiachin replaced him as king.
2CH 36:9 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem. He did evil in the sight of the Lord.
2CH 36:10 At the beginning of the year King Nebuchadnezzar ordered him to be brought to Babylon, along with the valuable items in the Lord’s temple. In his place he made his relative Zedekiah king over Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH 36:11 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he ruled for eleven years in Jerusalem.
2CH 36:12 He did evil in the sight of the Lord his God. He did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet, the Lord’s spokesman.
2CH 36:13 He also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him vow allegiance in the name of God. He was stubborn and obstinate, and refused to return to the Lord God of Israel.
2CH 36:14 All the leaders of the priests and people became more unfaithful and committed the same horrible sins practiced by the nations. They defiled the Lord’s temple which he had consecrated in Jerusalem.
2CH 36:15 The Lord God of their ancestors continually warned them through his messengers, for he felt compassion for his people and his dwelling place.
2CH 36:16 But they mocked God’s messengers, despised his warnings, and ridiculed his prophets. Finally the Lord got very angry at his people and there was no one who could prevent his judgment.
2CH 36:17 He brought against them the king of the Babylonians, who slaughtered their young men in their temple. He did not spare young men or women, or even the old and aging. God handed everyone over to him.
2CH 36:18 He carried away to Babylon all the items in God’s temple, whether large or small, as well as what was in the treasuries of the Lord’s temple and in the treasuries of the king and his officials.
2CH 36:19 They burned down the Lord’s temple and tore down the wall of Jerusalem. They burned all its fortified buildings and destroyed all its valuable items.
2CH 36:20 He deported to Babylon all who escaped the sword. They served him and his sons until the Persian kingdom rose to power.
2CH 36:21 This took place to fulfill the Lord’s message delivered through Jeremiah. The land experienced its sabbatical years; it remained desolate for seventy years, as prophesied.
2CH 36:22 In the first year of the reign of King Cyrus of Persia, in fulfillment of the promise he delivered through Jeremiah, the Lord moved King Cyrus of Persia to issue a written decree throughout his kingdom.
2CH 36:23 It read: “This is what King Cyrus of Persia says: ‘The Lord God of the heavens has given to me all the kingdoms of the earth. He has appointed me to build for him a temple in Jerusalem in Judah. May the Lord your God energize you who belong to his people, so you may be able to go back there!”
EZR 1:1 In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order to fulfill the Lord’s message spoken through Jeremiah, the Lord stirred the mind of King Cyrus of Persia. He disseminated a proclamation throughout his entire kingdom, announcing in a written edict the following:
EZR 1:2 “Thus says King Cyrus of Persia: “‘The Lord God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth. He has instructed me to build a temple for him in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
EZR 1:3 Anyone from his people among you (may his God be with him!) may go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and may build the temple of the Lord God of Israel – he is the God who is in Jerusalem.
EZR 1:4 Anyone who survives in any of those places where he is a resident foreigner must be helped by his neighbors with silver, gold, equipment, and animals, along with voluntary offerings for the temple of God which is in Jerusalem.’”
EZR 1:5 Then the leaders of Judah and Benjamin, along with the priests and the Levites – all those whose mind God had stirred – got ready to go up in order to build the temple of the Lord in Jerusalem.
EZR 1:6 All their neighbors assisted them with silver utensils, gold, equipment, animals, and expensive gifts, not to mention all the voluntary offerings.
EZR 1:7 Then King Cyrus brought out the vessels of the Lord’s temple which Nebuchadnezzar had brought from Jerusalem and had displayed in the temple of his gods.
EZR 1:8 King Cyrus of Persia entrusted them to Mithredath the treasurer, who counted them out to Sheshbazzar the leader of the Judahite exiles.
EZR 1:9 The inventory of these items was as follows: 30 gold basins, 1,000 silver basins, 29 silver utensils,
EZR 1:10 30 gold bowls, 410 other silver bowls, and 1,000 other vessels.
EZR 1:11 All these gold and silver vessels totaled 5,400. Sheshbazzar brought them all along when the captives were brought up from Babylon to Jerusalem.
EZR 2:1 These are the people of the province who were going up, from the captives of the exile whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had forced into exile in Babylon. They returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city.
EZR 2:2 They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, and Baanah. The number of Israelites was as follows:
EZR 2:3 the descendants of Parosh: 2,172;
EZR 2:4 the descendants of Shephatiah: 372;
EZR 2:5 the descendants of Arah: 775;
EZR 2:6 the descendants of Pahath-Moab (from the line of Jeshua and Joab): 2,812;
EZR 2:7 the descendants of Elam: 1,254;
EZR 2:8 the descendants of Zattu: 945;
EZR 2:9 the descendants of Zaccai: 760;
EZR 2:10 the descendants of Bani: 642;
EZR 2:11 the descendants of Bebai: 623;
EZR 2:12 the descendants of Azgad: 1,222;
EZR 2:13 the descendants of Adonikam: 666;
EZR 2:14 the descendants of Bigvai: 2,056;
EZR 2:15 the descendants of Adin: 454;
EZR 2:16 the descendants of Ater (through Hezekiah): 98;
EZR 2:17 the descendants of Bezai: 323;
EZR 2:18 the descendants of Jorah: 112;
EZR 2:19 the descendants of Hashum: 223;
EZR 2:20 the descendants of Gibbar: 95.
EZR 2:21 The men of Bethlehem: 123;
EZR 2:22 the men of Netophah: 56;
EZR 2:23 the men of Anathoth: 128;
EZR 2:24 the men of the family of Azmaveth: 42;
EZR 2:25 the men of Kiriath Jearim, Kephirah and Beeroth: 743;
EZR 2:26 the men of Ramah and Geba: 621;
EZR 2:27 the men of Micmash: 122;
EZR 2:28 the men of Bethel and Ai: 223;
EZR 2:29 the descendants of Nebo: 52;
EZR 2:30 the descendants of Magbish: 156;
EZR 2:31 the descendants of the other Elam: 1,254;
EZR 2:32 the descendants of Harim: 320;
EZR 2:33 the men of Lod, Hadid, and Ono: 725;
EZR 2:34 the men of Jericho: 345;
EZR 2:35 the descendants of Senaah: 3,630.
EZR 2:36 The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah (through the family of Jeshua): 973;
EZR 2:37 the descendants of Immer: 1,052;
EZR 2:38 the descendants of Pashhur: 1,247;
EZR 2:39 the descendants of Harim: 1,017.
EZR 2:40 The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua and Kadmiel (through the line of Hodaviah): 74.
EZR 2:41 The singers: the descendants of Asaph: 128.
EZR 2:42 The gatekeepers: the descendants of Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, and the descendants of Shobai: 139.
EZR 2:43 The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, the descendants of Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth,
EZR 2:44 the descendants of Keros, the descendants of Siaha, the descendants of Padon,
EZR 2:45 the descendants of Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, the descendants of Akkub,
EZR 2:46 the descendants of Hagab, the descendants of Shalmai, the descendants of Hanan,
EZR 2:47 the descendants of Giddel, the descendants of Gahar, the descendants of Reaiah,
EZR 2:48 the descendants of Rezin, the descendants of Nekoda, the descendants of Gazzam,
EZR 2:49 the descendants of Uzzah, the descendants of Paseah, the descendants of Besai,
EZR 2:50 the descendants of Asnah, the descendants of Meunim, the descendants of Nephussim,
EZR 2:51 the descendants of Bakbuk, the descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Harhur,
EZR 2:52 the descendants of Bazluth, the descendants of Mehida, the descendants of Harsha,
EZR 2:53 the descendants of Barkos, the descendants of Sisera, the descendants of Temah,
EZR 2:54 the descendants of Neziah, and the descendants of Hatipha.
EZR 2:55 The descendants of the servants of Solomon: the descendants of Sotai, the descendants of Hassophereth, the descendants of Peruda,
EZR 2:56 the descendants of Jaala, the descendants of Darkon, the descendants of Giddel,
EZR 2:57 the descendants of Shephatiah, the descendants of Hattil, the descendants of Pokereth-Hazzebaim, and the descendants of Ami.
EZR 2:58 All the temple servants and the descendants of the servants of Solomon: 392.
EZR 2:59 These are the ones that came up from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Kerub, Addon, and Immer (although they were unable to certify their family connection or their ancestry, as to whether they really were from Israel):
EZR 2:60 the descendants of Delaiah, the descendants of Tobiah, and the descendants of Nekoda: 652.
EZR 2:61 And from among the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, the descendants of Hakkoz, and the descendants of Barzillai (who had taken a wife from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by that name).
EZR 2:62 They searched for their records in the genealogical materials, but did not find them. They were therefore excluded from the priesthood.
EZR 2:63 The governor instructed them not to eat any of the sacred food until there was a priest who could consult the Urim and Thummim.
EZR 2:64 The entire group numbered 42,360,
EZR 2:65 not counting their male and female servants, who numbered 7,337. They also had 200 male and female singers
EZR 2:66 and 736 horses, 245 mules,
EZR 2:67 435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys.
EZR 2:68 When they came to the Lord’s temple in Jerusalem, some of the family leaders offered voluntary offerings for the temple of God in order to rebuild it on its site.
EZR 2:69 As they were able, they gave to the treasury for this work 61,000 drachmas of gold, 5,000 minas of silver, and 100 priestly robes.
EZR 2:70 The priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants lived in their towns, and all the rest of Israel lived in their towns.
EZR 3:1 When the seventh month arrived and the Israelites were living in their towns, the people assembled in Jerusalem.
EZR 3:2 Then Jeshua the son of Jozadak and his priestly colleagues and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and his colleagues started to build the altar of the God of Israel so they could offer burnt offerings on it as required by the law of Moses the man of God.
EZR 3:3 They established the altar on its foundations, even though they were in terror of the local peoples, and they offered burnt offerings on it to the Lord, both the morning and the evening offerings.
EZR 3:4 They observed the Festival of Temporary Shelters as required and offered the proper number of daily burnt offerings according to the requirement for each day.
EZR 3:5 Afterward they offered the continual burnt offerings and those for the new moons and those for all the holy assemblies of the Lord and all those that were being voluntarily offered to the Lord.
EZR 3:6 From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to the Lord. However, the Lord’s temple was not at that time established.
EZR 3:7 So they provided money for the masons and carpenters, and food, beverages, and olive oil for the people of Sidon so that they would bring cedar timber from Lebanon to the seaport at Joppa, in accord with the edict of King Cyrus of Persia.
EZR 3:8 In the second year after they had come to the temple of God in Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak initiated the work, along with the rest of their associates, the priests and the Levites, and all those who were coming to Jerusalem from the exile. They appointed the Levites who were at least twenty years old to take charge of the work on the Lord’s temple.
EZR 3:9 So Jeshua appointed both his sons and his relatives, Kadmiel and his sons (the sons of Yehudah ), to take charge of the workers in the temple of God, along with the sons of Henadad, their sons, and their relatives the Levites.
EZR 3:10 When the builders established the Lord’s temple, the priests, ceremonially attired and with their clarions, and the Levites (the sons of Asaph) with their cymbals, stood to praise the Lord according to the instructions left by King David of Israel.
EZR 3:11 With antiphonal response they sang, praising and glorifying the Lord: “For he is good; his loyal love toward Israel is forever.” All the people gave a loud shout as they praised the Lord when the temple of the Lord was established.
EZR 3:12 Many of the priests, the Levites, and the leaders – older people who had seen with their own eyes the former temple while it was still established – were weeping loudly, and many others raised their voice in a joyous shout.
EZR 3:13 People were unable to tell the difference between the sound of joyous shouting and the sound of the people’s weeping, for the people were shouting so loudly that the sound was heard a long way off.
EZR 4:1 When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin learned that the former exiles were building a temple for the Lord God of Israel,
EZR 4:2 they came to Zerubbabel and the leaders and said to them, “Let us help you build, for like you we seek your God and we have been sacrificing to him from the time of King Esarhaddon of Assyria, who brought us here.”
EZR 4:3 But Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the rest of the leaders of Israel said to them, “You have no right to help us build the temple of our God. We will build it by ourselves for the Lord God of Israel, just as King Cyrus, the king of Persia, has commanded us.”
EZR 4:4 Then the local people began to discourage the people of Judah and to dishearten them from building.
EZR 4:5 They were hiring advisers to oppose them, so as to frustrate their plans, throughout the time of King Cyrus of Persia until the reign of King Darius of Persia.
EZR 4:6 At the beginning of the reign of Ahasuerus they filed an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
EZR 4:7 And during the reign of Artaxerxes, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their colleagues wrote to King Artaxerxes of Persia. This letter was first written in Aramaic but then translated. [Aramaic:]
EZR 4:8 Rehum the commander and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter concerning Jerusalem to King Artaxerxes as follows:
EZR 4:9 From Rehum the commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their colleagues – the judges, the rulers, the officials, the secretaries, the Erechites, the Babylonians, the people of Susa (that is, the Elamites),
EZR 4:10 and the rest of nations whom the great and noble Ashurbanipal deported and settled in the cities of Samaria and other places in Trans-Euphrates.
EZR 4:11 (This is a copy of the letter they sent to him:) “To King Artaxerxes, from your servants in Trans-Euphrates:
EZR 4:12 Now let the king be aware that the Jews who came up to us from you have gone to Jerusalem. They are rebuilding that rebellious and odious city. They are completing its walls and repairing its foundations.
EZR 4:13 Let the king also be aware that if this city is built and its walls are completed, no more tax, custom, or toll will be paid, and the royal treasury will suffer loss.
EZR 4:14 In light of the fact that we are loyal to the king, and since it does not seem appropriate to us that the king should sustain damage, we are sending the king this information
EZR 4:15 so that he may initiate a search of the records of his predecessors and discover in those records that this city is rebellious and injurious to both kings and provinces, producing internal revolts from long ago. It is for this very reason that this city was destroyed.
EZR 4:16 We therefore are informing the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are completed, you will not retain control of this portion of Trans-Euphrates.”
EZR 4:17 The king sent the following response: “To Rehum the commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their colleagues who live in Samaria and other parts of Trans-Euphrates: Greetings!
EZR 4:18 The letter you sent to us has been translated and read in my presence.
EZR 4:19 So I gave orders, and it was determined that this city from long ago has been engaging in insurrection against kings. It has continually engaged in rebellion and revolt.
EZR 4:20 Powerful kings have been over Jerusalem who ruled throughout the entire Trans-Euphrates and who were the beneficiaries of tribute, custom, and toll.
EZR 4:21 Now give orders that these men cease their work and that this city not be rebuilt until such time as I so instruct.
EZR 4:22 Exercise appropriate caution so that there is no negligence in this matter. Why should danger increase to the point that kings sustain damage?”
EZR 4:23 Then, as soon as the copy of the letter from King Artaxerxes was read in the presence of Rehum, Shimshai the scribe, and their colleagues, they proceeded promptly to the Jews in Jerusalem and stopped them with threat of armed force.
EZR 4:24 So the work on the temple of God in Jerusalem came to a halt. It remained halted until the second year of the reign of King Darius of Persia.
EZR 5:1 Then the prophets Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied concerning the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel who was over them.
EZR 5:2 Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak began to rebuild the temple of God in Jerusalem. The prophets of God were with them, supporting them.
EZR 5:3 At that time Tattenai governor of Trans-Euphrates, Shethar-Bozenai, and their colleagues came to them and asked, “Who gave you authority to rebuild this temple and to complete this structure?”
EZR 5:4 They also asked them, “What are the names of the men who are building this edifice?”
EZR 5:5 But God was watching over the elders of Judah, and they were not stopped until a report could be dispatched to Darius and a letter could be sent back concerning this.
EZR 5:6 This is a copy of the letter that Tattenai governor of Trans-Euphrates, Shethar-Bozenai, and his colleagues who were the officials of Trans-Euphrates sent to King Darius.
EZR 5:7 The report they sent to him was written as follows: “To King Darius: All greetings!
EZR 5:8 Let it be known to the king that we have gone to the province of Judah, to the temple of the great God. It is being built with large stones, and timbers are being placed in the walls. This work is being done with all diligence and is prospering in their hands.
EZR 5:9 We inquired of those elders, asking them, ‘Who gave you the authority to rebuild this temple and to complete this structure?’
EZR 5:10 We also inquired of their names in order to inform you, so that we might write the names of the men who were their leaders.
EZR 5:11 They responded to us in the following way: ‘We are servants of the God of heaven and earth. We are rebuilding the temple which was previously built many years ago. A great king of Israel built it and completed it.
EZR 5:12 But after our ancestors angered the God of heaven, he delivered them into the hands of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this temple and exiled the people to Babylon.
EZR 5:13 But in the first year of King Cyrus of Babylon, King Cyrus enacted a decree to rebuild this temple of God.
EZR 5:14 Even the gold and silver vessels of the temple of God that Nebuchadnezzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem and had brought to the palace of Babylon – even those things King Cyrus brought from the palace of Babylon and presented to a man by the name of Sheshbazzar whom he had appointed as governor.
EZR 5:15 He said to him, “Take these vessels and go deposit them in the temple in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt in its proper location.”
EZR 5:16 Then this Sheshbazzar went and laid the foundations of the temple of God in Jerusalem. From that time to the present moment it has been in the process of being rebuilt, although it is not yet finished.’
EZR 5:17 “Now if the king is so inclined, let a search be conducted in the royal archives there in Babylon in order to determine whether King Cyrus did in fact issue orders for this temple of God to be rebuilt in Jerusalem. Then let the king send us a decision concerning this matter.”
EZR 6:1 So Darius the king issued orders, and they searched in the archives of the treasury which were deposited there in Babylon.
EZR 6:2 A scroll was found in the citadel of Ecbatana which is in the province of Media, and it was inscribed as follows: “Memorandum:
EZR 6:3 In the first year of his reign, King Cyrus gave orders concerning the temple of God in Jerusalem: ‘Let the temple be rebuilt as a place where sacrifices are offered. Let its foundations be set in place. Its height is to be ninety feet and its width ninety feet,
EZR 6:4 with three layers of large stones and one layer of timber. The expense is to be subsidized by the royal treasury.
EZR 6:5 Furthermore let the gold and silver vessels of the temple of God, which Nebuchadnezzar brought from the temple in Jerusalem and carried to Babylon, be returned and brought to their proper place in the temple in Jerusalem. Let them be deposited in the temple of God.’
EZR 6:6 “Now Tattenai governor of Trans-Euphrates, Shethar Bozenai, and their colleagues, the officials of Trans-Euphrates – all of you stay far away from there!
EZR 6:7 Leave the work on this temple of God alone. Let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews rebuild this temple of God in its proper place.
EZR 6:8 “I also hereby issue orders as to what you are to do with those elders of the Jews in order to rebuild this temple of God. From the royal treasury, from the taxes of Trans-Euphrates the complete costs are to be given to these men, so that there may be no interruption of the work.
EZR 6:9 Whatever is needed – whether oxen or rams or lambs or burnt offerings for the God of heaven or wheat or salt or wine or oil, as required by the priests who are in Jerusalem – must be given to them daily without any neglect,
EZR 6:10 so that they may be offering incense to the God of heaven and may be praying for the good fortune of the king and his family.
EZR 6:11 “I hereby give orders that if anyone changes this directive a beam is to be pulled out from his house and he is to be raised up and impaled on it, and his house is to be reduced to a rubbish heap for this indiscretion.
EZR 6:12 May God who makes his name to reside there overthrow any king or nation who reaches out to cause such change so as to destroy this temple of God in Jerusalem. I, Darius, have given orders. Let them be carried out with precision!”
EZR 6:13 Then Tattenai governor of Trans-Euphrates, Shethar-Bozenai, and their colleagues acted accordingly – with precision, just as Darius the king had given instructions.
EZR 6:14 The elders of the Jews continued building and prospering, while at the same time Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo continued prophesying. They built and brought it to completion by the command of the God of Israel and by the command of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes king of Persia.
EZR 6:15 They finished this temple on the third day of the month Adar, which is the sixth year of the reign of King Darius.
EZR 6:16 The people of Israel – the priests, the Levites, and the rest of the exiles – observed the dedication of this temple of God with joy.
EZR 6:17 For the dedication of this temple of God they offered one hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, and twelve male goats for the sin of all Israel, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.
EZR 6:18 They appointed the priests by their divisions and the Levites by their divisions over the worship of God at Jerusalem, in accord with the book of Moses.
EZR 6:19 The exiles observed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.
EZR 6:20 The priests and the Levites had purified themselves, every last one, and they all were ceremonially pure. They sacrificed the Passover lamb for all the exiles, for their colleagues the priests, and for themselves.
EZR 6:21 The Israelites who were returning from the exile ate it, along with all those who had joined them in separating themselves from the uncleanness of the nations of the land to seek the Lord God of Israel.
EZR 6:22 They observed the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days with joy, for the Lord had given them joy and had changed the opinion of the king of Assyria toward them, so that he assisted them in the work on the temple of God, the God of Israel.
EZR 7:1 Now after these things had happened, during the reign of King Artaxerxes of Persia, Ezra came up from Babylon. Ezra was the son of Seraiah, who was the son of Azariah, who was the son of Hilkiah,
EZR 7:2 who was the son of Shallum, who was the son of Zadok, who was the son of Ahitub,
EZR 7:3 who was the son of Amariah, who was the son of Azariah, who was the son of Meraioth,
EZR 7:4 who was the son of Zerahiah, who was the son of Uzzi, who was the son of Bukki,
EZR 7:5 who was the son of Abishua, who was the son of Phinehas, who was the son of Eleazar, who was the son of Aaron the chief priest.
EZR 7:6 This Ezra is the one who came up from Babylon. He was a scribe who was skilled in the law of Moses which the Lord God of Israel had given. The king supplied him with everything he requested, for the hand of the Lord his God was on him.
EZR 7:7 In the seventh year of King Artaxerxes, Ezra brought up to Jerusalem some of the Israelites and some of the priests, the Levites, the attendants, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants.
EZR 7:8 He entered Jerusalem in the fifth month of the seventh year of the king.
EZR 7:9 On the first day of the first month he had determined to make the ascent from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month he arrived at Jerusalem, for the good hand of his God was on him.
EZR 7:10 Now Ezra had dedicated himself to the study of the law of the Lord, to its observance, and to teaching its statutes and judgments in Israel.
EZR 7:11 What follows is a copy of the letter that King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priestly scribe. Ezra was a scribe in matters pertaining to the commandments of the Lord and his statutes over Israel:
EZR 7:12 “Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, a scribe of the perfect law of the God of heaven:
EZR 7:13 I have now issued a decree that anyone in my kingdom from the people of Israel – even the priests and Levites – who wishes to do so may go up with you to Jerusalem.
EZR 7:14 You are authorized by the king and his seven advisers to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of your God which is in your possession,
EZR 7:15 and to bring silver and gold which the king and his advisers have freely contributed to the God of Israel, who resides in Jerusalem,
EZR 7:16 along with all the silver and gold that you may collect throughout all the province of Babylon and the contributions of the people and the priests for the temple of their God which is in Jerusalem.
EZR 7:17 With this money you should be sure to purchase bulls, rams, and lambs, along with the appropriate meal offerings and libations. You should bring them to the altar of the temple of your God which is in Jerusalem.
EZR 7:18 You may do whatever seems appropriate to you and your colleagues with the rest of the silver and the gold, in keeping with the will of your God.
EZR 7:19 Deliver to the God of Jerusalem the vessels that are given to you for the service of the temple of your God.
EZR 7:20 The rest of the needs for the temple of your God that you may have to supply, you may do so from the royal treasury.
EZR 7:21 “I, King Artaxerxes, hereby issue orders to all the treasurers of Trans-Euphrates, that you precisely execute all that Ezra the priestly scribe of the law of the God of heaven may request of you –
EZR 7:22 up to 100 talents of silver, 100 cors of wheat, 100 baths of wine, 100 baths of olive oil, and unlimited salt.
EZR 7:23 Everything that the God of heaven has required should be precisely done for the temple of the God of heaven. Why should there be wrath against the empire of the king and his sons?
EZR 7:24 Furthermore, be aware of the fact that you have no authority to impose tax, tribute, or toll on any of the priests, the Levites, the musicians, the doorkeepers, the temple servants, or the attendants at the temple of this God.
EZR 7:25 “Now you, Ezra, in keeping with the wisdom of your God which you possess, appoint judges and court officials who can arbitrate cases on behalf of all the people who are in Trans-Euphrates who know the laws of your God. Those who do not know this law should be taught.
EZR 7:26 Everyone who does not observe both the law of your God and the law of the king will be completely liable to the appropriate penalty, whether it is death or banishment or confiscation of property or detainment in prison.”
EZR 7:27 Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, who so moved in the heart of the king to so honor the temple of the Lord which is in Jerusalem!
EZR 7:28 He has also conferred his favor on me before the king, his advisers, and all the influential leaders of the king. I gained strength as the hand of the Lord my God was on me, and I gathered leaders from Israel to go up with me.
EZR 8:1 These are the leaders and those enrolled with them by genealogy who were coming up with me from Babylon during the reign of King Artaxerxes:
EZR 8:2 from the descendants of Phinehas, Gershom; from the descendants of Ithamar, Daniel; from the descendants of David, Hattush
EZR 8:3 the son of Shecaniah; from the descendants of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him were enrolled by genealogy 150 men;
EZR 8:4 from the descendants of Pahath-Moab, Eliehoenai son of Zerahiah, and with him 200 men;
EZR 8:5 from the descendants of Zattu, Shecaniah son of Jahaziel, and with him 300 men;
EZR 8:6 from the descendants of Adin, Ebed son of Jonathan, and with him 50 men;
EZR 8:7 from the descendants of Elam, Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, and with him 70 men;
EZR 8:8 from the descendants of Shephatiah, Zebadiah son of Michael, and with him 80 men;
EZR 8:9 from the descendants of Joab, Obadiah son of Jehiel, and with him 218 men;
EZR 8:10 from the descendants of Bani, Shelomith son of Josiphiah, and with him 160 men;
EZR 8:11 from the descendants of Bebai, Zechariah son of Bebai, and with him 28 men;
EZR 8:12 from the descendants of Azgad, Johanan son of Hakkatan, and with him 110 men;
EZR 8:13 from the descendants of Adonikam there were the latter ones. Their names were Eliphelet, Jeuel, and Shemaiah, and with them 60 men;
EZR 8:14 from the descendants of Bigvai, Uthai, and Zaccur, and with them 70 men.
EZR 8:15 I had them assemble at the canal that flows toward Ahava, and we camped there for three days. I observed that the people and the priests were present, but I found no Levites there.
EZR 8:16 So I sent for Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and Meshullam, who were leaders, and Joiarib and Elnathan, who were teachers.
EZR 8:17 I sent them to Iddo, who was the leader in the place called Casiphia. I told them what to say to Iddo and his relatives, who were the temple servants in Casiphia, so they would bring us attendants for the temple of our God.
EZR 8:18 Due to the fact that the good hand of our God was on us, they brought us a skilled man, from the descendants of Mahli the son of Levi son of Israel. This man was Sherebiah, who was accompanied by his sons and brothers, 18 men,
EZR 8:19 and Hashabiah, along with Jeshaiah from the descendants of Merari, with his brothers and their sons, 20 men,
EZR 8:20 and some of the temple servants that David and his officials had established for the work of the Levites – 220 of them. They were all designated by name.
EZR 8:21 I called for a fast there by the Ahava Canal, so that we might humble ourselves before our God and seek from him a safe journey for us, our children, and all our property.
EZR 8:22 I was embarrassed to request soldiers and horsemen from the king to protect us from the enemy along the way, because we had said to the king, “The good hand of our God is on everyone who is seeking him, but his great anger is against everyone who forsakes him.”
EZR 8:23 So we fasted and prayed to our God about this, and he answered us.
EZR 8:24 Then I set apart twelve of the leading priests, together with Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brothers,
EZR 8:25 and I weighed out to them the silver, the gold, and the vessels intended for the temple of our God – items that the king, his advisers, his officials, and all Israel who were present had contributed.
EZR 8:26 I weighed out to them 650 talents of silver, silver vessels worth 100 talents, 100 talents of gold,
EZR 8:27 20 gold bowls worth 1,000 darics, and two exquisite vessels of gleaming bronze, as valuable as gold.
EZR 8:28 Then I said to them, “You are holy to the Lord, just as these vessels are holy. The silver and the gold are a voluntary offering to the Lord, the God of your fathers.
EZR 8:29 Be careful with them and protect them, until you weigh them out before the leading priests and the Levites and the family leaders of Israel in Jerusalem, in the storerooms of the temple of the Lord.”
EZR 8:30 Then the priests and the Levites took charge of the silver, the gold, and the vessels that had been weighed out, to transport them to Jerusalem to the temple of our God.
EZR 8:31 On the twelfth day of the first month we began traveling from the Ahava Canal to go to Jerusalem. The hand of our God was on us, and he delivered us from our enemy and from bandits along the way.
EZR 8:32 So we came to Jerusalem, and we stayed there for three days.
EZR 8:33 On the fourth day we weighed out the silver, the gold, and the vessels in the house of our God into the care of Meremoth son of Uriah, the priest, and Eleazar son of Phinehas, who were accompanied by Jozabad son of Jeshua and Noadiah son of Binnui, who were Levites.
EZR 8:34 Everything was verified by number and by weight, and the total weight was written down at that time.
EZR 8:35 The exiles who were returning from the captivity offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel – twelve bulls for all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven male lambs, along with twelve male goats as a sin offering. All this was a burnt offering to the Lord.
EZR 8:36 Then they presented the decrees of the king to the king’s satraps and to the governors of Trans-Euphrates, who gave help to the people and to the temple of God.
EZR 9:1 Now when these things had been completed, the leaders approached me and said, “The people of Israel, the priests, and the Levites have not separated themselves from the local residents who practice detestable things similar to those of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.
EZR 9:2 Indeed, they have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy race has become intermingled with the local residents. Worse still, the leaders and the officials have been at the forefront of all of this!”
EZR 9:3 When I heard this report, I tore my tunic and my robe and ripped out some of the hair from my head and beard. Then I sat down, quite devastated.
EZR 9:4 Everyone who held the words of the God of Israel in awe gathered around me because of the unfaithful acts of the people of the exile. Devastated, I continued to sit there until the evening offering.
EZR 9:5 At the time of the evening offering I got up from my self-abasement, with my tunic and robe torn, and then dropped to my knees and spread my hands to the Lord my God.
EZR 9:6 I prayed, “O my God, I am ashamed and embarrassed to lift my face to you, my God! For our iniquities have climbed higher than our heads, and our guilt extends to the heavens.
EZR 9:7 From the days of our fathers until this very day our guilt has been great. Because of our iniquities we, along with our kings and priests, have been delivered over by the local kings to sword, captivity, plunder, and embarrassment – right up to the present time.
EZR 9:8 “But now briefly we have received mercy from the Lord our God, in that he has left us a remnant and has given us a secure position in his holy place. Thus our God has enlightened our eyes and has given us a little relief in our time of servitude.
EZR 9:9 Although we are slaves, our God has not abandoned us in our servitude. He has extended kindness to us in the sight of the kings of Persia, in that he has revived us to restore the temple of our God and to raise up its ruins and to give us a protective wall in Judah and Jerusalem.
EZR 9:10 “And now what are we able to say after this, our God? For we have forsaken your commandments
EZR 9:11 which you commanded us through your servants the prophets with these words: ‘The land that you are entering to possess is a land defiled by the impurities of the local residents! With their abominations they have filled it from one end to the other with their filthiness.
EZR 9:12 Therefore do not give your daughters in marriage to their sons, and do not take their daughters in marriage for your sons. Do not ever seek their peace or welfare, so that you may be strong and may eat the good of the land and may leave it as an inheritance for your children forever.’
EZR 9:13 “Everything that has happened to us has come about because of our wicked actions and our great guilt. Even so, our God, you have exercised restraint toward our iniquities and have given us a remnant such as this.
EZR 9:14 Shall we once again break your commandments and intermarry with these abominable peoples? Would you not be so angered by us that you would wipe us out, with no survivor or remnant?
EZR 9:15 O Lord God of Israel, you are righteous, for we are left as a remnant this day. Indeed, we stand before you in our guilt. However, because of this guilt no one can really stand before you.”
EZR 10:1 While Ezra was praying and confessing, weeping and throwing himself to the ground before the temple of God, a very large crowd of Israelites – men, women, and children alike – gathered around him. The people wept loudly.
EZR 10:2 Then Shecaniah son of Jehiel, from the descendants of Elam, addressed Ezra: “We have been unfaithful to our God by marrying foreign women from the local peoples. Nonetheless, there is still hope for Israel in this regard.
EZR 10:3 Therefore let us enact a covenant with our God to send away all these women and their offspring, in keeping with your counsel, my lord, and that of those who respect the commandments of our God. And let it be done according to the law.
EZR 10:4 Get up, for this matter concerns you. We are with you, so be strong and act decisively!”
EZR 10:5 So Ezra got up and made the leading priests and Levites and all Israel take an oath to carry out this plan. And they all took a solemn oath.
EZR 10:6 Then Ezra got up from in front of the temple of God and went to the room of Jehohanan son of Eliashib. While he stayed there, he did not eat food or drink water, for he was in mourning over the infidelity of the exiles.
EZR 10:7 A proclamation was circulated throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the exiles were to be assembled in Jerusalem.
EZR 10:8 Everyone who did not come within three days would thereby forfeit all his property, in keeping with the counsel of the officials and the elders. Furthermore, he himself would be excluded from the assembly of the exiles.
EZR 10:9 All the men of Judah and Benjamin were gathered in Jerusalem within the three days. (It was in the ninth month, on the twentieth day of that month.) All the people sat in the square at the temple of God, trembling because of this matter and because of the rains.
EZR 10:10 Then Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, “You have behaved in an unfaithful manner by taking foreign wives! This has contributed to the guilt of Israel.
EZR 10:11 Now give praise to the Lord God of your fathers, and do his will. Separate yourselves from the local residents and from these foreign wives.”
EZR 10:12 All the assembly replied in a loud voice: “We will do just as you have said!
EZR 10:13 However, the people are numerous and it is the rainy season. We are unable to stand here outside. Furthermore, this business cannot be resolved in a day or two, for we have sinned greatly in this matter.
EZR 10:14 Let our leaders take steps on behalf of all the assembly. Let all those in our towns who have married foreign women come at an appointed time, and with them the elders of each town and its judges, until the hot anger of our God is turned away from us in this matter.”
EZR 10:15 Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah were against this, assisted by Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite.
EZR 10:16 So the exiles proceeded accordingly. Ezra the priest separated out by name men who were leaders in their family groups. They sat down to consider this matter on the first day of the tenth month,
EZR 10:17 and on the first day of the first month they finished considering all the men who had married foreign wives.
EZR 10:18 It was determined that from the descendants of the priests, the following had taken foreign wives: from the descendants of Jeshua son of Jozadak, and his brothers: Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah.
EZR 10:19 (They gave their word to send away their wives; their guilt offering was a ram from the flock for their guilt.)
EZR 10:20 From the descendants of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah.
EZR 10:21 From the descendants of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah.
EZR 10:22 From the descendants of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
EZR 10:23 From the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah (also known as Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
EZR 10:24 From the singers: Eliashib. From the gatekeepers: Shallum, Telem, and Uri.
EZR 10:25 From the Israelites: from the descendants of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malkijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Malkijah, and Benaiah.
EZR 10:26 From the descendants of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and Elijah.
EZR 10:27 From the descendants of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza.
EZR 10:28 From the descendants of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai.
EZR 10:29 From the descendants of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth.
EZR 10:30 From the descendants of Pahath-Moab: Adna, Kelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh.
EZR 10:31 From the descendants of Harim: Eliezer, Ishijah, Malkijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
EZR 10:32 Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah.
EZR 10:33 From the descendants of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.
EZR 10:34 From the descendants of Bani: Maadai, Amram, Uel,
EZR 10:35 Benaiah, Bedeiah, Keluhi,
EZR 10:36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
EZR 10:37 Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasu.
EZR 10:38 From the descendants of Binnui: Shimei,
EZR 10:39 Shelemiah, Nathan, Adaiah,
EZR 10:40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
EZR 10:41 Azarel, Shelemiah, Shemariah,
EZR 10:42 Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph.
EZR 10:43 From the descendants of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah.
EZR 10:44 All these had taken foreign wives, and some of them also had children by these women.
NEH 1:1 These are the words of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah: It so happened that in the month of Kislev, in the twentieth year, I was in Susa the citadel.
NEH 1:2 Hanani, who was one of my relatives, along with some of the men from Judah, came to me, and I asked them about the Jews who had escaped and had survived the exile, and about Jerusalem.
NEH 1:3 They said to me, “The remnant that remains from the exile there in the province are experiencing considerable adversity and reproach. The wall of Jerusalem lies breached, and its gates have been burned down!”
NEH 1:4 When I heard these things I sat down abruptly, crying and mourning for several days. I continued fasting and praying before the God of heaven.
NEH 1:5 Then I said, “Please, O LORD God of heaven, great and awesome God, who keeps his loving covenant with those who love him and obey his commandments,
NEH 1:6 may your ear be attentive and your eyes be open to hear the prayer of your servant that I am praying to you today throughout both day and night on behalf of your servants the Israelites. I am confessing the sins of the Israelites that we have committed against you – both I myself and my family have sinned.
NEH 1:7 We have behaved corruptly against you, not obeying the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments that you commanded your servant Moses.
NEH 1:8 Please recall the word you commanded your servant Moses: ‘If you act unfaithfully, I will scatter you among the nations.
NEH 1:9 But if you repent and obey my commandments and do them, then even if your dispersed people are in the most remote location, I will gather them from there and bring them to the place I have chosen for my name to reside.’
NEH 1:10 They are your servants and your people, whom you have redeemed by your mighty strength and by your powerful hand.
NEH 1:11 Please, O Lord, listen attentively to the prayer of your servant and to the prayer of your servants who take pleasure in showing respect to your name. Grant your servant success today and show compassion to me in the presence of this man.” Now I was cupbearer for the king.
NEH 2:1 Then in the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes, when wine was brought to me, I took the wine and gave it to the king. Previously I had not been depressed in the king’s presence.
NEH 2:2 So the king said to me, “Why do you appear to be depressed when you aren’t sick? What can this be other than sadness of heart?” This made me very fearful.
NEH 2:3 I replied to the king, “O king, live forever! Why would I not appear dejected when the city with the graves of my ancestors lies desolate and its gates destroyed by fire?”
NEH 2:4 The king responded, “What is it you are seeking?” Then I quickly prayed to the God of heaven
NEH 2:5 and said to the king, “If the king is so inclined and if your servant has found favor in your sight, dispatch me to Judah, to the city with the graves of my ancestors, so that I can rebuild it.”
NEH 2:6 Then the king, with his consort sitting beside him, replied, “How long would your trip take, and when would you return?” Since the king was amenable to dispatching me, I gave him a time.
NEH 2:7 I said to the king, “If the king is so inclined, let him give me letters for the governors of Trans-Euphrates that will enable me to travel safely until I reach Judah,
NEH 2:8 and a letter for Asaph the keeper of the king’s nature preserve, so that he will give me timber for beams for the gates of the fortress adjacent to the temple and for the city wall and for the house to which I go.” So the king granted me these requests, for the good hand of my God was on me.
NEH 2:9 Then I went to the governors of Trans-Euphrates, and I presented to them the letters from the king. The king had sent with me officers of the army and horsemen.
NEH 2:10 When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard all this, they were very displeased that someone had come to seek benefit for the Israelites.
NEH 2:11 So I came to Jerusalem. When I had been there for three days,
NEH 2:12 I got up during the night, along with a few men who were with me. But I did not tell anyone what my God was putting on my heart to do for Jerusalem. There were no animals with me, except for the one I was riding.
NEH 2:13 I proceeded through the Valley Gate by night, in the direction of the Well of the Dragons and the Dung Gate, inspecting the walls of Jerusalem that had been breached and its gates that had been destroyed by fire.
NEH 2:14 I passed on to the Gate of the Well and the King’s Pool, where there was not enough room for my animal to pass with me.
NEH 2:15 I continued up the valley during the night, inspecting the wall. Then I turned back and came to the Valley Gate, and so returned.
NEH 2:16 The officials did not know where I had gone or what I had been doing, for up to this point I had not told any of the Jews or the priests or the nobles or the officials or the rest of the workers.
NEH 2:17 Then I said to them, “You see the problem that we have: Jerusalem is desolate and its gates are burned. Come on! Let’s rebuild the wall of Jerusalem so that this reproach will not continue.”
NEH 2:18 Then I related to them how the good hand of my God was on me and what the king had said to me. Then they replied, “Let’s begin rebuilding right away!” So they readied themselves for this good project.
NEH 2:19 But when Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the Ammonite official, and Geshem the Arab heard all this, they derided us and expressed contempt toward us. They said, “What is this you are doing? Are you rebelling against the king?”
NEH 2:20 I responded to them by saying, “The God of heaven will prosper us. We his servants will start the rebuilding. But you have no just or ancient right in Jerusalem.”
NEH 3:1 Then Eliashib the high priest and his priestly colleagues arose and built the Sheep Gate. They dedicated it and erected its doors, working as far as the Tower of the Hundred and the Tower of Hananel.
NEH 3:2 The men of Jericho built adjacent to it, and Zaccur son of Imri built adjacent to them.
NEH 3:3 The sons of Hassenaah rebuilt the Fish Gate. They laid its beams and positioned its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
NEH 3:4 Meremoth son of Uriah, the son of Hakoz, worked on the section adjacent to them. Meshullam son of Berechiah the son of Meshezabel worked on the section next to them. And Zadok son of Baana worked on the section adjacent to them.
NEH 3:5 The men of Tekoa worked on the section adjacent to them, but their town leaders would not assist with the work of their master.
NEH 3:6 Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah worked on the Jeshanah Gate. They laid its beams and positioned its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
NEH 3:7 Adjacent to them worked Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon the Meronothite, who were men of Gibeon and Mizpah. These towns were under the jurisdiction of the governor of Trans-Euphrates.
NEH 3:8 Uzziel son of Harhaiah, a member of the goldsmiths’ guild, worked on the section adjacent to him. Hananiah, a member of the perfumers’ guild, worked on the section adjacent to him. They plastered the city wall of Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall.
NEH 3:9 Rephaiah son of Hur, head of a half-district of Jerusalem, worked on the section adjacent to them.
NEH 3:10 Jedaiah son of Harumaph worked on the section adjacent to them opposite his house, and Hattush son of Hashabneiah worked on the section adjacent to him.
NEH 3:11 Malkijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-Moab worked on another section and the Tower of the Fire Pots.
NEH 3:12 Shallum son of Hallohesh, head of a half-district of Jerusalem, worked on the section adjacent to him, assisted by his daughters.
NEH 3:13 Hanun and the residents of Zanoah worked on the Valley Gate. They rebuilt it and positioned its doors, its bolts, and its bars, in addition to working on fifteen hundred feet of the wall as far as the Dung Gate.
NEH 3:14 Malkijah son of Recab, head of the district of Beth Hakkerem, worked on the Dung Gate. He rebuilt it and positioned its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
NEH 3:15 Shallun son of Col-Hozeh, head of the district of Mizpah, worked on the Fountain Gate. He rebuilt it, put on its roof, and positioned its doors, its bolts, and its bars. In addition, he rebuilt the wall of the Pool of Siloam, by the royal garden, as far as the steps that go down from the City of David.
NEH 3:16 Nehemiah son of Azbuk, head of a half-district of Beth Zur, worked after him as far as the tombs of David and the artificial pool and the House of the Warriors.
NEH 3:17 After him the Levites worked – Rehum son of Bani and after him Hashabiah, head of half the district of Keilah, for his district.
NEH 3:18 After him their relatives worked – Binnui son of Henadad, head of a half-district of Keilah.
NEH 3:19 Adjacent to him Ezer son of Jeshua, head of Mizpah, worked on another section, opposite the ascent to the armory at the buttress.
NEH 3:20 After him Baruch son of Zabbai worked on another section, from the buttress to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
NEH 3:21 After him Meremoth son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, worked on another section from the door of Eliashib’s house to the end of it.
NEH 3:22 After him the priests worked, men of the nearby district.
NEH 3:23 After them Benjamin and Hasshub worked opposite their house. After them Azariah son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, worked near his house.
NEH 3:24 After him Binnui son of Henadad worked on another section, from the house of Azariah to the buttress and the corner.
NEH 3:25 After him Palal son of Uzai worked opposite the buttress and the tower that protrudes from the upper palace of the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah son of Parosh
NEH 3:26 and the temple servants who were living on Ophel worked up to the area opposite the Water Gate toward the east and the protruding tower.
NEH 3:27 After them the men of Tekoa worked on another section, from opposite the great protruding tower to the wall of Ophel.
NEH 3:28 Above the Horse Gate the priests worked, each in front of his house.
NEH 3:29 After them Zadok son of Immer worked opposite his house, and after him Shemaiah son of Shecaniah, guard at the East Gate, worked.
NEH 3:30 After him Hananiah son of Shelemiah, and Hanun, the sixth son of Zalaph, worked on another section. After them Meshullam son of Berechiah worked opposite his quarters.
NEH 3:31 After him Malkijah, one of the goldsmiths, worked as far as the house of the temple servants and the traders, opposite the Inspection Gate, and up to the room above the corner.
NEH 3:32 And between the room above the corner and the Sheep Gate the goldsmiths and traders worked.
NEH 4:1 Now when Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall he became angry and was quite upset. He derided the Jews,
NEH 4:2 and in the presence of his colleagues and the army of Samaria he said, “What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they be left to themselves? Will they again offer sacrifice? Will they finish this in a day? Can they bring these burnt stones to life again from piles of dust?”
NEH 4:3 Then Tobiah the Ammonite, who was close by, said, “If even a fox were to climb up on what they are building, it would break down their wall of stones!”
NEH 4:4 Hear, O our God, for we are despised! Return their reproach on their own head! Reduce them to plunder in a land of exile!
NEH 4:5 Do not cover their iniquity, and do not wipe out their sin from before them. For they have bitterly offended the builders!
NEH 4:6 So we rebuilt the wall, and the entire wall was joined together up to half its height. The people were enthusiastic in their work.
NEH 4:7 When Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabs, the Ammonites, and the people of Ashdod heard that the restoration of the walls of Jerusalem had moved ahead and that the breaches had begun to be closed, they were very angry.
NEH 4:8 All of them conspired together to move with armed forces against Jerusalem and to create a disturbance in it.
NEH 4:9 So we prayed to our God and stationed a guard to protect against them both day and night.
NEH 4:10 Then those in Judah said, “The strength of the laborers has failed! The debris is so great that we are unable to rebuild the wall.”
NEH 4:11 Our adversaries also boasted, “Before they are aware or anticipate anything, we will come in among them and kill them, and we will bring this work to a halt!”
NEH 4:12 So it happened that the Jews who were living near them came and warned us repeatedly about all the schemes they were plotting against us.
NEH 4:13 So I stationed people at the lower places behind the wall in the exposed places. I stationed the people by families, with their swords, spears, and bows.
NEH 4:14 When I had made an inspection, I stood up and said to the nobles, the officials, and the rest of the people, “Don’t be afraid of them. Remember the great and awesome Lord, and fight on behalf of your brothers, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your families!”
NEH 4:15 It so happened that when our adversaries heard that we were aware of these matters, God frustrated their intentions. Then all of us returned to the wall, each to his own work.
NEH 4:16 From that day forward, half of my men were doing the work and half of them were taking up spears, shields, bows, and body armor. Now the officers were behind all the people of Judah
NEH 4:17 who were rebuilding the wall. Those who were carrying loads did so by keeping one hand on the work and the other on their weapon.
NEH 4:18 The builders to a man had their swords strapped to their sides while they were building. But the trumpeter remained with me.
NEH 4:19 I said to the nobles, the officials, and the rest of the people, “The work is demanding and extensive, and we are spread out on the wall, far removed from one another.
NEH 4:20 Wherever you hear the sound of the trumpet, gather there with us. Our God will fight for us!”
NEH 4:21 So we worked on, with half holding spears, from dawn till dusk.
NEH 4:22 At that time I instructed the people, “Let every man and his coworker spend the night in Jerusalem and let them be guards for us by night and workers by day.
NEH 4:23 We did not change clothes – not I, nor my relatives, nor my workers, nor the watchmen who were with me. Each had his weapon, even when getting a drink of water.
NEH 5:1 Then there was a great outcry from the people and their wives against their fellow Jews.
NEH 5:2 There were those who said, “With our sons and daughters, we are many. We must obtain grain in order to eat and stay alive.”
NEH 5:3 There were others who said, “We are putting up our fields, our vineyards, and our houses as collateral in order to obtain grain during the famine.”
NEH 5:4 Then there were those who said, “We have borrowed money to pay our taxes to the king on our fields and our vineyards.
NEH 5:5 And now, though we share the same flesh and blood as our fellow countrymen, and our children are just like their children, still we have found it necessary to subject our sons and daughters to slavery. Some of our daughters have been subjected to slavery, while we are powerless to help, since our fields and vineyards now belong to other people.”
NEH 5:6 I was very angry when I heard their outcry and these complaints.
NEH 5:7 I considered these things carefully and then registered a complaint with the wealthy and the officials. I said to them, “Each one of you is seizing the collateral from your own countrymen!” Because of them I called for a great public assembly.
NEH 5:8 I said to them, “To the extent possible we have bought back our fellow Jews who had been sold to the Gentiles. But now you yourselves want to sell your own countrymen, so that we can then buy them back!” They were utterly silent, and could find nothing to say.
NEH 5:9 Then I said, “The thing that you are doing is wrong! Should you not conduct yourselves in the fear of our God in order to avoid the reproach of the Gentiles who are our enemies?
NEH 5:10 Even I and my relatives and my associates are lending them money and grain. But let us abandon this practice of seizing collateral!
NEH 5:11 This very day return to them their fields, their vineyards, their olive trees, and their houses, along with the interest that you are exacting from them on the money, the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil.”
NEH 5:12 They replied, “We will return these things, and we will no longer demand anything from them. We will do just as you say.” Then I called the priests and made the wealthy and the officials swear to do what had been promised.
NEH 5:13 I also shook out my garment, and I said, “In this way may God shake out from his house and his property every person who does not carry out this matter. In this way may he be shaken out and emptied!” All the assembly replied, “So be it!” and they praised the LORD. Then the people did as they had promised.
NEH 5:14 From the day that I was appointed governor in the land of Judah, that is, from the twentieth year until the thirty-second year of King Artaxerxes – twelve years in all – neither I nor my relatives ate the food allotted to the governor.
NEH 5:15 But the former governors who preceded me had burdened the people and had taken food and wine from them, in addition to forty shekels of silver. Their associates were also domineering over the people. But I did not behave in this way, due to my fear of God.
NEH 5:16 I gave myself to the work on this wall, without even purchasing a field. All my associates were gathered there for the work.
NEH 5:17 There were 150 Jews and officials who dined with me routinely, in addition to those who came to us from the nations all around us.
NEH 5:18 Every day one ox, six select sheep, and some birds were prepared for me, and every ten days all kinds of wine in abundance. Despite all this I did not require the food allotted to the governor, for the work was demanding on this people.
NEH 5:19 Please remember me for good, O my God, for all that I have done for this people.
NEH 6:1 When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arab, and the rest of our enemies heard that I had rebuilt the wall and no breach remained in it (even though up to that time I had not positioned doors in the gates),
NEH 6:2 Sanballat and Geshem sent word to me saying, “Come on! Let’s set up a time to meet together at Kephirim in the plain of Ono.” Now they intended to do me harm.
NEH 6:3 So I sent messengers to them saying, “I am engaged in an important work, and I am unable to come down. Why should the work come to a halt when I leave it to come down to you?”
NEH 6:4 They contacted me four times in this way, and I responded the same way each time.
NEH 6:5 The fifth time that Sanballat sent his assistant to me in this way, he had an open letter in his hand.
NEH 6:6 Written in it were the following words: “Among the nations it is rumored (and Geshem has substantiated this) that you and the Jews have intentions of revolting, and for this reason you are building the wall. Furthermore, according to these rumors you are going to become their king.
NEH 6:7 You have also established prophets to announce in Jerusalem on your behalf, ‘We have a king in Judah!’ Now the king is going to hear about these rumors. So come on! Let’s talk about this.”
NEH 6:8 I sent word back to him, “We are not engaged in these activities you are describing. All of this is a figment of your imagination.”
NEH 6:9 All of them were wanting to scare us, supposing, “Their hands will grow slack from the work, and it won’t get done.” So now, strengthen my hands!
NEH 6:10 Then I went to the house of Shemaiah son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabel. He was confined to his home. He said, “Let’s set up a time to meet in the house of God, within the temple. Let’s close the doors of the temple, for they are coming to kill you. It will surely be at night that they will come to kill you.”
NEH 6:11 But I replied, “Should a man like me run away? Would someone like me flee to the temple in order to save his life? I will not go!”
NEH 6:12 I recognized the fact that God had not sent him, for he had spoken the prophecy against me as a hired agent of Tobiah and Sanballat.
NEH 6:13 He had been hired to scare me so that I would do this and thereby sin. They would thus bring reproach on me and I would be discredited.
NEH 6:14 Remember, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat in light of these actions of theirs – also Noadiah the prophetess and the other prophets who were trying to scare me!
NEH 6:15 So the wall was completed on the twenty-fifth day of Elul, in just fifty-two days.
NEH 6:16 When all our enemies heard and all the nations who were around us saw this, they were greatly disheartened. They knew that this work had been accomplished with the help of our God.
NEH 6:17 In those days the aristocrats of Judah repeatedly sent letters to Tobiah, and responses from Tobiah were repeatedly coming to them.
NEH 6:18 For many in Judah had sworn allegiance to him, because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah son of Arah. His son Jonathan had married the daughter of Meshullam son of Berechiah.
NEH 6:19 They were telling me about his good deeds and then taking back to him the things I said. Tobiah, on the other hand, sent letters in order to scare me.
NEH 7:1 When the wall had been rebuilt and I had positioned the doors, and the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites had been appointed,
NEH 7:2 I then put in charge over Jerusalem my brother Hanani and Hananiah the chief of the citadel, for he was a faithful man and feared God more than many do.
NEH 7:3 I said to them, “The gates of Jerusalem must not be opened in the early morning, until those who are standing guard close the doors and lock them. Position residents of Jerusalem as guards, some at their guard stations and some near their homes.”
NEH 7:4 Now the city was spread out and large, and there were not a lot of people in it. At that time houses had not been rebuilt.
NEH 7:5 My God placed it on my heart to gather the leaders, the officials, and the ordinary people so they could be enrolled on the basis of genealogy. I found the genealogical records of those who had formerly returned. Here is what I found written in that record:
NEH 7:6 These are the people of the province who returned from the captivity of the exiles, whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had forced into exile. They returned to Jerusalem and to Judah, each to his own city.
NEH 7:7 They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah. The number of Israelite men was as follows:
NEH 7:8 the descendants of Parosh, 2,172;
NEH 7:9 the descendants of Shephatiah, 372;
NEH 7:10 the descendants of Arah, 652;
NEH 7:11 the descendants of Pahath-Moab (from the line of Jeshua and Joab), 2,818;
NEH 7:12 the descendants of Elam, 1,254;
NEH 7:13 the descendants of Zattu, 845;
NEH 7:14 the descendants of Zaccai, 760;
NEH 7:15 the descendants of Binnui, 648;
NEH 7:16 the descendants of Bebai, 628;
NEH 7:17 the descendants of Azgad, 2,322;
NEH 7:18 the descendants of Adonikam, 667;
NEH 7:19 the descendants of Bigvai, 2,067;
NEH 7:20 the descendants of Adin, 655;
NEH 7:21 the descendants of Ater (through Hezekiah), 98;
NEH 7:22 the descendants of Hashum, 328;
NEH 7:23 the descendants of Bezai, 324;
NEH 7:24 the descendants of Harif, 112;
NEH 7:25 the descendants of Gibeon, 95;
NEH 7:26 The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, 188;
NEH 7:27 the men of Anathoth, 128;
NEH 7:28 the men of the family of Azmaveth, 42;
NEH 7:29 the men of Kiriath Jearim, Kephirah, and Beeroth, 743;
NEH 7:30 the men of Ramah and Geba, 621;
NEH 7:31 the men of Micmash, 122;
NEH 7:32 the men of Bethel and Ai, 123;
NEH 7:33 the men of the other Nebo, 52;
NEH 7:34 the descendants of the other Elam, 1,254;
NEH 7:35 the descendants of Harim, 320;
NEH 7:36 the descendants of Jericho, 345;
NEH 7:37 the descendants of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, 721;
NEH 7:38 the descendants of Senaah, 3,930.
NEH 7:39 The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah (through the family of Jeshua), 973;
NEH 7:40 the descendants of Immer, 1,052;
NEH 7:41 the descendants of Pashhur, 1,247;
NEH 7:42 the descendants of Harim, 1,017.
NEH 7:43 The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua (through Kadmiel, through the line of Hodaviah), 74.
NEH 7:44 The singers: the descendants of Asaph, 148.
NEH 7:45 The gatekeepers: the descendants of Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, and the descendants of Shobai, 138.
NEH 7:46 The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, the descendants of Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth,
NEH 7:47 the descendants of Keros, the descendants of Sia, the descendants of Padon,
NEH 7:48 the descendants of Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, the descendants of Shalmai,
NEH 7:49 the descendants of Hanan, the descendants of Giddel, the descendants of Gahar,
NEH 7:50 the descendants of Reaiah, the descendants of Rezin, the descendants of Nekoda,
NEH 7:51 the descendants of Gazzam, the descendants of Uzzah, the descendants of Paseah,
NEH 7:52 the descendants of Besai, the descendants of Meunim, the descendants of Nephussim,
NEH 7:53 the descendants of Bakbuk, the descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Harhur,
NEH 7:54 the descendants of Bazluth, the descendants of Mehida, the descendants of Harsha,
NEH 7:55 the descendants of Barkos, the descendants of Sisera, the descendants of Temah,
NEH 7:56 the descendants of Neziah, the descendants of Hatipha.
NEH 7:57 The descendants of the servants of Solomon: the descendants of Sotai, the descendants of Sophereth, the descendants of Perida,
NEH 7:58 the descendants of Jaala, the descendants of Darkon, the descendants of Giddel,
NEH 7:59 the descendants of Shephatiah, the descendants of Hattil, the descendants of Pokereth-Hazzebaim, and the descendants of Amon.
NEH 7:60 All the temple servants and the descendants of the servants of Solomon, 392.
NEH 7:61 These are the ones who came up from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Kerub, Addon, and Immer (although they were unable to certify their family connection or their ancestry, as to whether they were really from Israel):
NEH 7:62 the descendants of Delaiah, the descendants of Tobiah, and the descendants of Nekoda, 642.
NEH 7:63 And from among the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, the descendants of Hakkoz, and the descendants of Barzillai (who had married a woman from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by that name).
NEH 7:64 They searched for their records in the genealogical materials, but none were found. They were therefore excluded from the priesthood.
NEH 7:65 The governor instructed them not to eat any of the sacred food until there was a priest who could consult the Urim and Thummim.
NEH 7:66 The entire group numbered 42,360,
NEH 7:67 not counting their 7,337 male and female servants. They also had 245 male and female singers.
NEH 7:68 They had 736 horses, 245 mules,
NEH 7:69 435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys.
NEH 7:70 Some of the family leaders contributed to the work. The governor contributed to the treasury 1,000 gold drachmas, 50 bowls, and 530 priestly garments.
NEH 7:71 Some of the family leaders gave to the project treasury 20,000 gold drachmas and 2,200 silver minas.
NEH 7:72 What the rest of the people gave amounted to 20,000 gold drachmas, 2,000 silver minas, and 67 priestly garments.
NEH 7:73 The priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple servants, and all the rest of Israel lived in their cities. When the seventh month arrived and the Israelites were settled in their cities,
NEH 8:1 all the people gathered together in the plaza which was in front of the Water Gate. They asked Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses which the LORD had commanded Israel.
NEH 8:2 So Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly which included men and women and all those able to understand what they heard. (This happened on the first day of the seventh month.)
NEH 8:3 So he read it before the plaza in front of the Water Gate from dawn till noon before the men and women and those children who could understand. All the people were eager to hear the book of the law.
NEH 8:4 Ezra the scribe stood on a towering wooden platform constructed for this purpose. Standing near him on his right were Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Masseiah. On his left were Pedaiah, Mishael, Malkijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
NEH 8:5 Ezra opened the book in plain view of all the people, for he was elevated above all the people. When he opened the book, all the people stood up.
NEH 8:6 Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God, and all the people replied “Amen! Amen!” as they lifted their hands. Then they bowed down and worshiped the LORD with their faces to the ground.
NEH 8:7 Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, and Pelaiah – all of whom were Levites – were teaching the people the law, as the people remained standing.
NEH 8:8 They read from the book of God’s law, explaining it and imparting insight. Thus the people gained understanding from what was read.
NEH 8:9 Then Nehemiah the governor, Ezra the priestly scribe, and the Levites who were imparting understanding to the people said to all of them, “This day is holy to the LORD your God. Do not mourn or weep.” For all the people had been weeping when they heard the words of the law.
NEH 8:10 He said to them, “Go and eat delicacies and drink sweet drinks and send portions to those for whom nothing is prepared. For this day is holy to our Lord. Do not grieve, for the joy of the LORD is your strength.”
NEH 8:11 Then the Levites quieted all the people saying, “Be quiet, for this day is holy. Do not grieve.”
NEH 8:12 So all the people departed to eat and drink and to share their food with others and to enjoy tremendous joy, for they had gained insight in the matters that had been made known to them.
NEH 8:13 On the second day of the month the family leaders met with Ezra the scribe, together with all the people, the priests, and the Levites, to consider the words of the law.
NEH 8:14 They discovered written in the law that the LORD had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should live in temporary shelters during the festival of the seventh month,
NEH 8:15 and that they should make a proclamation and disseminate this message in all their cities and in Jerusalem: “Go to the hill country and bring back olive branches and branches of wild olive trees, myrtle trees, date palms, and other leafy trees to construct temporary shelters, as it is written.”
NEH 8:16 So the people went out and brought these things back and constructed temporary shelters for themselves, each on his roof and in his courtyard and in the courtyards of the temple of God and in the plaza of the Water Gate and the plaza of the Ephraim Gate.
NEH 8:17 So all the assembly which had returned from the exile constructed temporary shelters and lived in them. The Israelites had not done so from the days of Joshua son of Nun until that day. Everyone experienced very great joy.
NEH 8:18 Ezra read in the book of the law of God day by day, from the first day to the last. They observed the festival for seven days, and on the eighth day they held an assembly as was required.
NEH 9:1 On the twenty-fourth day of this same month the Israelites assembled; they were fasting and wearing sackcloth, their heads covered with dust.
NEH 9:2 Those truly of Israelite descent separated from all the foreigners, standing and confessing their sins and the iniquities of their ancestors.
NEH 9:3 For one-fourth of the day they stood in their place and read from the book of the law of the LORD their God, and for another fourth they were confessing their sins and worshiping the LORD their God.
NEH 9:4 Then the Levites – Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Kenani – stood on the steps and called out loudly to the LORD their God.
NEH 9:5 The Levites – Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah – said, “Stand up and bless the LORD your God!” “May you be blessed, O LORD our God, from age to age. May your glorious name be blessed; may it be lifted up above all blessing and praise.
NEH 9:6 You alone are the LORD. You made the heavens, even the highest heavens, along with all their multitude of stars, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them. You impart life to them all, and the multitudes of heaven worship you.
NEH 9:7 “You are the LORD God who chose Abram and brought him forth from Ur of the Chaldeans. You changed his name to Abraham.
NEH 9:8 When you perceived that his heart was faithful toward you, you established a covenant with him to give his descendants the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, and the Girgashites. You have fulfilled your promise, for you are righteous.
NEH 9:9 “You saw the affliction of our ancestors in Egypt, and you heard their cry at the Red Sea.
NEH 9:10 You performed awesome signs against Pharaoh, against his servants, and against all the people of his land, for you knew that the Egyptians had acted presumptuously against them. You made for yourself a name that is celebrated to this day.
NEH 9:11 You split the sea before them, and they crossed through the sea on dry ground! But you threw their pursuers into the depths, like a stone into surging waters.
NEH 9:12 You guided them with a pillar of cloud by day and with a pillar of fire by night to illumine for them the path they were to travel.
NEH 9:13 “You came down on Mount Sinai and spoke with them from heaven. You provided them with just judgments, true laws, and good statutes and commandments.
NEH 9:14 You made known to them your holy Sabbath; you issued commandments, statutes, and law to them through Moses your servant.
NEH 9:15 You provided bread from heaven for them in their time of hunger, and you brought forth water from the rock for them in their time of thirst. You told them to enter in order to possess the land that you had sworn to give them.
NEH 9:16 “But they – our ancestors – behaved presumptuously; they rebelled and did not obey your commandments.
NEH 9:17 They refused to obey and did not recall your miracles that you had performed among them. Instead, they rebelled and appointed a leader to return to their bondage in Egypt. But you are a God of forgiveness, merciful and compassionate, slow to get angry and unfailing in your loyal love. You did not abandon them,
NEH 9:18 even when they made a cast image of a calf for themselves and said, ‘This is your God who brought you up from Egypt,’ or when they committed atrocious blasphemies.
NEH 9:19 “Due to your great compassion you did not abandon them in the desert. The pillar of cloud did not stop guiding them in the path by day, nor did the pillar of fire stop illuminating for them by night the path on which they should travel.
NEH 9:20 You imparted your good Spirit to instruct them. You did not withhold your manna from their mouths; you provided water for their thirst.
NEH 9:21 For forty years you sustained them. Even in the desert they never lacked anything. Their clothes did not wear out and their feet did not swell.
NEH 9:22 “You gave them kingdoms and peoples, and you allocated them to every corner of the land. They inherited the land of King Sihon of Heshbon and the land of King Og of Bashan.
NEH 9:23 You multiplied their descendants like the stars of the sky. You brought them to the land you had told their ancestors to enter in order to possess.
NEH 9:24 Their descendants entered and possessed the land. You subdued before them the Canaanites who were the inhabitants of the land. You delivered them into their hand, together with their kings and the peoples of the land, to deal with as they pleased.
NEH 9:25 They captured fortified cities and fertile land. They took possession of houses full of all sorts of good things – wells previously dug, vineyards, olive trees, and fruit trees in abundance. They ate until they were full and grew fat. They enjoyed to the full your great goodness.
NEH 9:26 “Nonetheless they grew disobedient and rebelled against you; they disregarded your law. They killed your prophets who had solemnly admonished them in order to cause them to return to you. They committed atrocious blasphemies.
NEH 9:27 Therefore you delivered them into the hand of their adversaries, who oppressed them. But in the time of their distress they called to you, and you heard from heaven. In your abundant compassion you provided them with deliverers to rescue them from their adversaries.
NEH 9:28 “Then, when they were at rest again, they went back to doing evil before you. Then you abandoned them to their enemies, and they gained dominion over them. When they again cried out to you, in your compassion you heard from heaven and rescued them time and again.
NEH 9:29 And you solemnly admonished them in order to return them to your law, but they behaved presumptuously and did not obey your commandments. They sinned against your ordinances – those by which an individual, if he obeys them, will live. They boldly turned from you; they rebelled and did not obey.
NEH 9:30 You prolonged your kindness with them for many years, and you solemnly admonished them by your Spirit through your prophets. Still they paid no attention, so you delivered them into the hands of the neighboring peoples.
NEH 9:31 However, due to your abundant mercy you did not do away with them altogether; you did not abandon them. For you are a merciful and compassionate God.
NEH 9:32 “So now, our God – the great, powerful, and awesome God, who keeps covenant fidelity – do not regard as inconsequential all the hardship that has befallen us – our kings, our leaders, our priests, our prophets, our ancestors, and all your people – from the days of the kings of Assyria until this very day!
NEH 9:33 You are righteous with regard to all that has happened to us, for you have acted faithfully. It is we who have been in the wrong!
NEH 9:34 Our kings, our leaders, our priests, and our ancestors have not kept your law. They have not paid attention to your commandments or your testimonies by which you have solemnly admonished them.
NEH 9:35 Even when they were in their kingdom and benefiting from your incredible goodness that you had lavished on them in the spacious and fertile land you had set before them, they did not serve you, nor did they turn from their evil practices.
NEH 9:36 “So today we are slaves! In the very land you gave to our ancestors to eat its fruit and to enjoy its good things – we are slaves!
NEH 9:37 Its abundant produce goes to the kings you have placed over us due to our sins. They rule over our bodies and our livestock as they see fit, and we are in great distress!
NEH 9:38 “Because of all of this we are entering into a binding covenant in written form; our leaders, our Levites, and our priests have affixed their names on the sealed document.”
NEH 10:1 On the sealed documents were the following names: Nehemiah the governor, son of Hacaliah, along with Zedekiah,
NEH 10:2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
NEH 10:3 Pashhur, Amariah, Malkijah,
NEH 10:4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
NEH 10:5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
NEH 10:6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
NEH 10:7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
NEH 10:8 Maaziah, Bilgai, and Shemaiah. These were the priests.
NEH 10:9 The Levites were as follows: Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel.
NEH 10:10 Their colleagues were as follows: Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
NEH 10:11 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,
NEH 10:12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
NEH 10:13 Hodiah, Bani, and Beninu.
NEH 10:14 The leaders of the people were as follows: Parosh, Pahath-Moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,
NEH 10:15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
NEH 10:16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
NEH 10:17 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
NEH 10:18 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
NEH 10:19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
NEH 10:20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
NEH 10:21 Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
NEH 10:22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
NEH 10:23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,
NEH 10:24 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
NEH 10:25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
NEH 10:26 Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,
NEH 10:27 Malluch, Harim, and Baanah.
NEH 10:28 “Now the rest of the people – the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple attendants, and all those who have separated themselves from the neighboring peoples because of the law of God, along with their wives, their sons, and their daughters, all of whom are able to understand –
NEH 10:29 hereby participate with their colleagues the town leaders and enter into a curse and an oath to adhere to the law of God which was given through Moses the servant of God, and to obey carefully all the commandments of the LORD our Lord, along with his ordinances and his statutes.
NEH 10:30 “We will not give our daughters in marriage to the neighboring peoples, and we will not take their daughters in marriage for our sons.
NEH 10:31 We will not buy on the Sabbath or on a holy day from the neighboring peoples who bring their wares and all kinds of grain to sell on the Sabbath day. We will let the fields lie fallow every seventh year, and we will cancel every loan.
NEH 10:32 We accept responsibility for fulfilling the commands to give one third of a shekel each year for the work of the temple of our God,
NEH 10:33 for the loaves of presentation and for the regular grain offerings and regular burnt offerings, for the Sabbaths, for the new moons, for the appointed meetings, for the holy offerings, for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the temple of our God.
NEH 10:34 “We – the priests, the Levites, and the people – have cast lots concerning the wood offerings, to bring them to the temple of our God according to our families at the designated times year by year to burn on the altar of the LORD our God, as is written in the law.
NEH 10:35 We also accept responsibility for bringing the first fruits of our land and the first fruits of every fruit tree year by year to the temple of the LORD.
NEH 10:36 We also accept responsibility, as is written in the law, for bringing the firstborn of our sons and our cattle and the firstborn of our herds and of our flocks to the temple of our God, to the priests who are ministering in the temple of our God.
NEH 10:37 We will also bring the first of our coarse meal, of our contributions, of the fruit of every tree, of new wine, and of olive oil to the priests at the storerooms of the temple of our God, along with a tenth of the produce of our land to the Levites, for the Levites are the ones who collect the tithes in all the cities where we work.
NEH 10:38 A priest of Aaron’s line will be with the Levites when the Levites collect the tithes, and the Levites will bring up a tenth of the tithes to the temple of our God, to the storerooms of the treasury.
NEH 10:39 The Israelites and the Levites will bring the contribution of the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil to the storerooms where the utensils of the sanctuary are kept, and where the priests who minister stay, along with the gatekeepers and the singers. We will not neglect the temple of our God.”
NEH 11:1 So the leaders of the people settled in Jerusalem, while the rest of the people cast lots to bring one out of every ten to settle in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine remained in other cities.
NEH 11:2 The people gave their blessing on all the men who volunteered to settle in Jerusalem.
NEH 11:3 These are the provincial leaders who settled in Jerusalem. (While other Israelites, the priests, the Levites, the temple attendants, and the sons of the servants of Solomon settled in the cities of Judah, each on his own property in their cities,
NEH 11:4 some of the descendants of Judah and some of the descendants of Benjamin settled in Jerusalem.) Of the descendants of Judah: Athaiah son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, from the descendants of Perez;
NEH 11:5 and Maaseiah son of Baruch, the son of Col-Hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, from the descendants of Shelah.
NEH 11:6 The sum total of the descendants of Perez who were settling in Jerusalem was 468 exceptional men.
NEH 11:7 These are the descendants of Benjamin: Sallu son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah,
NEH 11:8 and his followers, Gabbai and Sallai – 928 in all.
NEH 11:9 Joel son of Zicri was the officer in charge of them, and Judah son of Hassenuah was second-in-command over the city.
NEH 11:10 From the priests: Jedaiah son of Joiarib, Jakin,
NEH 11:11 Seraiah son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, supervisor in the temple of God,
NEH 11:12 and their colleagues who were carrying out work for the temple – 822; and Adaiah son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malkijah,
NEH 11:13 and his colleagues who were heads of families – 242; and Amashsai son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
NEH 11:14 and his colleagues who were exceptional men – 128. The officer over them was Zabdiel the son of Haggedolim.
NEH 11:15 From the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;
NEH 11:16 Shabbethai and Jozabad, leaders of the Levites, were in charge of the external work for the temple of God;
NEH 11:17 Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, the praise leader who led in thanksgiving and prayer; Bakbukiah, second among his colleagues; and Abda son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
NEH 11:18 The sum total of the Levites in the holy city was 284.
NEH 11:19 And the gatekeepers: Akkub, Talmon and their colleagues who were guarding the gates – 172.
NEH 11:20 And the rest of the Israelites, with the priests and the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, each on his own property.
NEH 11:21 The temple attendants were living on Ophel, and Ziha and Gishpa were over them.
NEH 11:22 The overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica. He was one of Asaph’s descendants who were the singers responsible for the service of the temple of God.
NEH 11:23 For they were under royal orders which determined their activity day by day.
NEH 11:24 Pethahiah son of Meshezabel, one of the descendants of Zerah son of Judah, was an adviser to the king in every matter pertaining to the people.
NEH 11:25 As for the settlements with their fields, some of the people of Judah settled in Kiriath Arba and its neighboring villages, in Dibon and its villages, in Jekabzeel and its settlements,
NEH 11:26 in Jeshua, in Moladah, in Beth Pelet,
NEH 11:27 in Hazar Shual, in Beer Sheba and its villages,
NEH 11:28 in Ziklag, in Meconah and its villages,
NEH 11:29 in En Rimmon, in Zorah, in Jarmuth,
NEH 11:30 Zanoah, Adullam and their settlements, in Lachish and its fields, and in Azekah and its villages. So they were encamped from Beer Sheba to the Valley of Hinnom.
NEH 11:31 Some of the descendants of Benjamin settled in Geba, Micmash, Aija, Bethel and its villages,
NEH 11:32 in Anathoth, Nob, and Ananiah,
NEH 11:33 in Hazor, Ramah, and Gittaim,
NEH 11:34 in Hadid, Zeboim, and Neballat,
NEH 11:35 in Lod, Ono, and the Valley of the Craftsmen.
NEH 11:36 Some of the Judean divisions of the Levites settled in Benjamin.
NEH 12:1 These are the priests and Levites who returned with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
NEH 12:2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
NEH 12:3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
NEH 12:4 Iddo, Ginnethon, Abijah,
NEH 12:5 Mijamin, Moadiah, Bilgah,
NEH 12:6 Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah,
NEH 12:7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah. These were the leaders of the priests and their colleagues in the days of Jeshua.
NEH 12:8 And the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who together with his colleagues was in charge of the songs of thanksgiving.
NEH 12:9 Bakbukiah and Unni, their colleagues, stood opposite them in the services.
NEH 12:10 Jeshua was the father of Joiakim, Joiakim was the father of Eliashib, Eliashib was the father of Joiada,
NEH 12:11 Joiada was the father of Jonathan, and Jonathan was the father of Jaddua.
NEH 12:12 In the days of Joiakim, these were the priests who were leaders of the families: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
NEH 12:13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
NEH 12:14 of Malluch, Jonathan; of Shecaniah, Joseph;
NEH 12:15 of Harim, Adna; of Meremoth, Helkai;
NEH 12:16 of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
NEH 12:17 of Abijah, Zicri; of Miniamin and of Moadiah, Piltai;
NEH 12:18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
NEH 12:19 of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
NEH 12:20 of Sallu, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
NEH 12:21 of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
NEH 12:22 As for the Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan and Jaddua the heads of families were recorded, as were the priests during the reign of Darius the Persian.
NEH 12:23 The descendants of Levi were recorded in the Book of the Chronicles as heads of families up to the days of Johanan son of Eliashib.
NEH 12:24 And the leaders of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, Jeshua son of Kadmiel, and their colleagues, who stood opposite them to offer praise and thanks, one contingent corresponding to the other, as specified by David the man of God.
NEH 12:25 Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were gatekeepers who were guarding the storerooms at the gates.
NEH 12:26 These all served in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor and of Ezra the priestly scribe.
NEH 12:27 At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought out the Levites from all the places they lived to bring them to Jerusalem to celebrate the dedication joyfully with songs of thanksgiving and songs accompanied by cymbals, harps, and lyres.
NEH 12:28 The singers were also assembled from the district around Jerusalem and from the settlements of the Netophathites
NEH 12:29 and from Beth Gilgal and from the fields of Geba and Azmaveth, for the singers had built settlements for themselves around Jerusalem.
NEH 12:30 When the priests and Levites had purified themselves, they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.
NEH 12:31 I brought the leaders of Judah up on top of the wall, and I appointed two large choirs to give thanks. One was to proceed on the top of the wall southward toward the Dung Gate.
NEH 12:32 Going after them were Hoshaiah, half the leaders of Judah,
NEH 12:33 Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam,
NEH 12:34 Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, Jeremiah,
NEH 12:35 some of the priests with trumpets, Zechariah son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph,
NEH 12:36 and his colleagues – Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani – with musical instruments of David the man of God. (Ezra the scribe led them.)
NEH 12:37 They went over the Fountain Gate and continued directly up the steps of the City of David on the ascent to the wall. They passed the house of David and continued on to the Water Gate toward the east.
NEH 12:38 The second choir was proceeding in the opposite direction. I followed them, along with half the people, on top of the wall, past the Tower of the Ovens to the Broad Wall,
NEH 12:39 over the Ephraim Gate, the Jeshanah Gate, the Fish Gate, the Tower of Hananel, and the Tower of the Hundred, to the Sheep Gate. They stopped at the Gate of the Guard.
NEH 12:40 Then the two choirs that gave thanks took their stations in the temple of God. I did also, along with half the officials with me,
NEH 12:41 and the priests – Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with their trumpets –
NEH 12:42 and also Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malkijah, Elam, and Ezer. The choirs sang loudly under the direction of Jezrahiah.
NEH 12:43 And on that day they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced, for God had given them great joy. The women and children also rejoiced. The rejoicing in Jerusalem could be heard from far away.
NEH 12:44 On that day men were appointed over the storerooms for the contributions, first fruits, and tithes, to gather into them from the fields of the cities the portions prescribed by the law for the priests and the Levites, for the people of Judah took delight in the priests and Levites who were ministering.
NEH 12:45 They performed the service of their God and the service of purification, along with the singers and gatekeepers, according to the commandment of David and his son Solomon.
NEH 12:46 For long ago, in the days of David and Asaph, there had been directors for the singers and for the songs of praise and thanks to God.
NEH 12:47 So in the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah, all Israel was contributing the portions for the singers and gatekeepers, according to the daily need. They also set aside the portion for the Levites, and the Levites set aside the portion for the descendants of Aaron.
NEH 13:1 On that day the book of Moses was read aloud in the hearing of the people. They found written in it that no Ammonite or Moabite may ever enter the assembly of God,
NEH 13:2 for they had not met the Israelites with food and water, but instead had hired Balaam to curse them. (Our God, however, turned the curse into blessing.)
NEH 13:3 When they heard the law, they removed from Israel all who were of mixed ancestry.
NEH 13:4 But prior to this time, Eliashib the priest, a relative of Tobiah, had been appointed over the storerooms of the temple of our God.
NEH 13:5 He made for himself a large storeroom where previously they had been keeping the grain offering, the incense, and the vessels, along with the tithes of the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil as commanded for the Levites, the singers, the gate keepers, and the offering for the priests.
NEH 13:6 During all this time I was not in Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second year of King Artaxerxes of Babylon, I had gone back to the king. After some time I had requested leave of the king,
NEH 13:7 and I returned to Jerusalem. Then I discovered the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah by supplying him with a storeroom in the courts of the temple of God.
NEH 13:8 I was very upset, and I threw all of Tobiah’s household possessions out of the storeroom.
NEH 13:9 Then I gave instructions that the storerooms should be purified, and I brought back the equipment of the temple of God, along with the grain offering and the incense.
NEH 13:10 I also discovered that the grain offerings for the Levites had not been provided, and that as a result the Levites and the singers who performed this work had all gone off to their fields.
NEH 13:11 So I registered a complaint with the leaders, asking “Why is the temple of God neglected?” Then I gathered them and reassigned them to their positions.
NEH 13:12 Then all of Judah brought the tithe of the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil to the storerooms.
NEH 13:13 I gave instructions that Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, and a certain Levite named Pedaiah be put in charge of the storerooms, and that Hanan son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah, be their assistant, for they were regarded as trustworthy. It was then their responsibility to oversee the distribution to their colleagues.
NEH 13:14 Please remember me for this, O my God, and do not wipe out the kindness that I have done for the temple of my God and for its services!
NEH 13:15 In those days I saw people in Judah treading winepresses on the Sabbath, bringing in heaps of grain and loading them onto donkeys, along with wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of loads, and bringing them to Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I warned them on the day that they sold these provisions.
NEH 13:16 The people from Tyre who lived there were bringing fish and all kinds of merchandise and were selling it on the Sabbath to the people of Judah – and in Jerusalem, of all places!
NEH 13:17 So I registered a complaint with the nobles of Judah, saying to them, “What is this evil thing that you are doing, profaning the Sabbath day?
NEH 13:18 Isn’t this the way your ancestors acted, causing our God to bring on them and on this city all this misfortune? And now you are causing even more wrath on Israel, profaning the Sabbath like this!”
NEH 13:19 When the evening shadows began to fall on the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath, I ordered the doors to be closed. I further directed that they were not to be opened until after the Sabbath. I positioned some of my young men at the gates so that no load could enter on the Sabbath day.
NEH 13:20 The traders and sellers of all kinds of merchandise spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice.
NEH 13:21 But I warned them and said, “Why do you spend the night by the wall? If you repeat this, I will forcibly remove you!” From that time on they did not show up on the Sabbath.
NEH 13:22 Then I directed the Levites to purify themselves and come and guard the gates in order to keep the Sabbath day holy. For this please remember me, O my God, and have pity on me in keeping with your great love.
NEH 13:23 Also in those days I saw the men of Judah who had married women from Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab.
NEH 13:24 Half of their children spoke the language of Ashdod (or the language of one of the other peoples mentioned ) and were unable to speak the language of Judah.
NEH 13:25 So I entered a complaint with them. I called down a curse on them, and I struck some of the men and pulled out their hair. I had them swear by God saying, “You will not marry off your daughters to their sons, and you will not take any of their daughters as wives for your sons or for yourselves!
NEH 13:26 Was it not because of things like these that King Solomon of Israel sinned? Among the many nations there was no king like him. He was loved by his God, and God made him king over all Israel. But the foreign wives made even him sin!
NEH 13:27 Should we then in your case hear that you do all this great evil, thereby being unfaithful to our God by marrying foreign wives?”
NEH 13:28 Now one of the sons of Joiada son of Eliashib the high priest was a son-in-law of Sanballat the Horonite. So I banished him from my sight.
NEH 13:29 Please remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, the covenant of the priesthood, and the Levites.
NEH 13:30 So I purified them of everything foreign, and I assigned specific duties to the priests and the Levites.
NEH 13:31 I also provided for the wood offering at the appointed times and also for the first fruits. Please remember me for good, O my God.
EST 1:1 The following events happened in the days of Ahasuerus. (I am referring to that Ahasuerus who used to rule over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces extending all the way from India to Ethiopia. )
EST 1:2 In those days, as King Ahasuerus sat on his royal throne in Susa the citadel,
EST 1:3 in the third year of his reign he provided a banquet for all his officials and his servants. The army of Persia and Media was present, as well as the nobles and the officials of the provinces.
EST 1:4 He displayed the riches of his royal glory and the splendor of his majestic greatness for a lengthy period of time – a hundred and eighty days, to be exact!
EST 1:5 When those days were completed, the king then provided a seven-day banquet for all the people who were present in Susa the citadel, for those of highest standing to the most lowly. It was held in the court located in the garden of the royal palace.
EST 1:6 The furnishings included linen and purple curtains hung by cords of the finest linen and purple wool on silver rings, alabaster columns, gold and silver couches displayed on a floor made of valuable stones of alabaster, mother-of-pearl, and mineral stone.
EST 1:7 Drinks were served in golden containers, all of which differed from one another. Royal wine was available in abundance at the king’s expense.
EST 1:8 There were no restrictions on the drinking, for the king had instructed all of his supervisors that they should do as everyone so desired.
EST 1:9 Queen Vashti also gave a banquet for the women in King Ahasuerus’ royal palace.
EST 1:10 On the seventh day, as King Ahasuerus was feeling the effects of the wine, he ordered Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven eunuchs who attended him,
EST 1:11 to bring Queen Vashti into the king’s presence wearing her royal high turban. He wanted to show the people and the officials her beauty, for she was very attractive.
EST 1:12 But Queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s bidding conveyed through the eunuchs. Then the king became extremely angry, and his rage consumed him.
EST 1:13 The king then inquired of the wise men who were discerners of the times – for it was the royal custom to confer with all those who were proficient in laws and legalities.
EST 1:14 Those who were closest to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan. These men were the seven officials of Persia and Media who saw the king on a regular basis and had the most prominent offices in the kingdom.
EST 1:15 The king asked, “By law, what should be done to Queen Vashti in light of the fact that she has not obeyed the instructions of King Ahasuerus conveyed through the eunuchs?”
EST 1:16 Memucan then replied to the king and the officials, “The wrong of Queen Vashti is not against the king alone, but against all the officials and all the people who are throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus.
EST 1:17 For the matter concerning the queen will spread to all the women, leading them to treat their husbands with contempt, saying, ‘When King Ahasuerus gave orders to bring Queen Vashti into his presence, she would not come.’
EST 1:18 And this very day the noble ladies of Persia and Media who have heard the matter concerning the queen will respond in the same way to all the royal officials, and there will be more than enough contempt and anger!
EST 1:19 If the king is so inclined, let a royal edict go forth from him, and let it be written in the laws of Persia and Media that cannot be repealed, that Vashti may not come into the presence of King Ahasuerus, and let the king convey her royalty to another who is more deserving than she.
EST 1:20 And let the king’s decision which he will enact be disseminated throughout all his kingdom, vast though it is. Then all the women will give honor to their husbands, from the most prominent to the lowly.”
EST 1:21 The matter seemed appropriate to the king and the officials. So the king acted on the advice of Memucan.
EST 1:22 He sent letters throughout all the royal provinces, to each province according to its own script and to each people according to its own language, that every man should be ruling his family and should be speaking the language of his own people.
EST 2:1 When these things had been accomplished and the rage of King Ahasuerus had diminished, he remembered Vashti and what she had done and what had been decided against her.
EST 2:2 The king’s servants who attended him said, “Let a search be conducted in the king’s behalf for attractive young women.
EST 2:3 And let the king appoint officers throughout all the provinces of his kingdom to gather all the attractive young women to Susa the citadel, to the harem under the authority of Hegai, the king’s eunuch who oversees the women, and let him provide whatever cosmetics they desire.
EST 2:4 Let the young woman whom the king finds most attractive become queen in place of Vashti.” This seemed like a good idea to the king, so he acted accordingly.
EST 2:5 Now there happened to be a Jewish man in Susa the citadel whose name was Mordecai. He was the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjaminite,
EST 2:6 who had been taken into exile from Jerusalem with the captives who had been carried into exile with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had taken into exile.
EST 2:7 Now he was acting as the guardian of Hadassah (that is, Esther), the daughter of his uncle, for neither her father nor her mother was alive. This young woman was very attractive and had a beautiful figure. When her father and mother died, Mordecai had raised her as if she were his own daughter.
EST 2:8 It so happened that when the king’s edict and his law became known many young women were taken to Susa the citadel to be placed under the authority of Hegai. Esther also was taken to the royal palace to be under the authority of Hegai, who was overseeing the women.
EST 2:9 This young woman pleased him, and she found favor with him. He quickly provided her with her cosmetics and her rations; he also provided her with the seven specially chosen young women who were from the palace. He then transferred her and her young women to the best quarters in the harem.
EST 2:10 Now Esther had not disclosed her people or her lineage, for Mordecai had instructed her not to do so.
EST 2:11 And day after day Mordecai used to walk back and forth in front of the court of the harem in order to learn how Esther was doing and what might happen to her.
EST 2:12 At the end of the twelve months that were required for the women, when the turn of each young woman arrived to go to King Ahasuerus – for in this way they had to fulfill their time of cosmetic treatment: six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with perfume and various ointments used by women –
EST 2:13 the woman would go to the king in the following way: Whatever she asked for would be provided for her to take with her from the harem to the royal palace.
EST 2:14 In the evening she went, and in the morning she returned to a separate part of the harem, to the authority of Shaashgaz the king’s eunuch who was overseeing the concubines. She would not go back to the king unless the king was pleased with her and she was requested by name.
EST 2:15 When it became the turn of Esther daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai (who had raised her as if she were his own daughter ) to go to the king, she did not request anything except what Hegai the king’s eunuch, who was overseer of the women, had recommended. Yet Esther met with the approval of all who saw her.
EST 2:16 Then Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus at his royal residence in the tenth month (that is, the month of Tebeth) in the seventh year of his reign.
EST 2:17 And the king loved Esther more than all the other women, and she met with his loving approval more than all the other young women. So he placed the royal high turban on her head and appointed her queen in place of Vashti.
EST 2:18 Then the king prepared a large banquet for all his officials and his servants – it was actually Esther’s banquet. He also set aside a holiday for the provinces, and he provided for offerings at the king’s expense.
EST 2:19 Now when the young women were being gathered again, Mordecai was sitting at the king’s gate.
EST 2:20 Esther was still not divulging her lineage or her people, just as Mordecai had instructed her. Esther continued to do whatever Mordecai said, just as she had done when he was raising her.
EST 2:21 In those days while Mordecai was sitting at the king’s gate, Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who protected the entrance, became angry and plotted to assassinate King Ahasuerus.
EST 2:22 When Mordecai learned of the conspiracy, he informed Queen Esther, and Esther told the king in Mordecai’s behalf.
EST 2:23 The king then had the matter investigated and, finding it to be so, had the two conspirators hanged on a gallows. It was then recorded in the daily chronicles in the king’s presence.
EST 3:1 Some time later King Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, exalting him and setting his position above that of all the officials who were with him.
EST 3:2 As a result, all the king’s servants who were at the king’s gate were bowing and paying homage to Haman, for the king had so commanded. However, Mordecai did not bow, nor did he pay him homage.
EST 3:3 Then the servants of the king who were at the king’s gate asked Mordecai, “Why are you violating the king’s commandment?”
EST 3:4 And after they had spoken to him day after day without his paying any attention to them, they informed Haman to see whether this attitude on Mordecai’s part would be permitted. Furthermore, he had disclosed to them that he was a Jew.
EST 3:5 When Haman saw that Mordecai was not bowing or paying homage to him, he was filled with rage.
EST 3:6 But the thought of striking out against Mordecai alone was repugnant to him, for he had been informed of the identity of Mordecai’s people. So Haman sought to destroy all the Jews (that is, the people of Mordecai) who were in all the kingdom of Ahasuerus.
EST 3:7 In the first month (that is, the month of Nisan), in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus’ reign, pur (that is, the lot) was cast before Haman in order to determine a day and a month. It turned out to be the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar).
EST 3:8 Then Haman said to King Ahasuerus, “There is a particular people that is dispersed and spread among the inhabitants throughout all the provinces of your kingdom whose laws differ from those of all other peoples. Furthermore, they do not observe the king’s laws. It is not appropriate for the king to provide a haven for them.
EST 3:9 If the king is so inclined, let an edict be issued to destroy them. I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to be conveyed to the king’s treasuries for the officials who carry out this business.”
EST 3:10 So the king removed his signet ring from his hand and gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, who was hostile toward the Jews.
EST 3:11 The king replied to Haman, “Keep your money, and do with those people whatever you wish.”
EST 3:12 So the royal scribes were summoned in the first month, on the thirteenth day of the month. Everything Haman commanded was written to the king’s satraps and governors who were in every province and to the officials of every people, province by province according to its script and people by people according to its language. In the name of King Ahasuerus it was written and sealed with the king’s signet ring.
EST 3:13 Letters were sent by the runners to all the king’s provinces stating that they should destroy, kill, and annihilate all the Jews, from youth to elderly, both women and children, on a particular day, namely the thirteenth day of the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar), and to loot and plunder their possessions.
EST 3:14 A copy of this edict was to be presented as law throughout every province; it was to be made known to all the inhabitants, so that they would be prepared for this day.
EST 3:15 The messengers scurried forth with the king’s order. The edict was issued in Susa the citadel. While the king and Haman sat down to drink, the city of Susa was in an uproar!
EST 4:1 Now when Mordecai became aware of all that had been done, he tore his garments and put on sackcloth and ashes. He went out into the city, crying out in a loud and bitter voice.
EST 4:2 But he went no further than the king’s gate, for no one was permitted to enter the king’s gate clothed in sackcloth.
EST 4:3 Throughout each and every province where the king’s edict and law were announced there was considerable mourning among the Jews, along with fasting, weeping, and sorrow. Sackcloth and ashes were characteristic of many.
EST 4:4 When Esther’s female attendants and her eunuchs came and informed her about Mordecai’s behavior, the queen was overcome with anguish. Although she sent garments for Mordecai to put on so that he could remove his sackcloth, he would not accept them.
EST 4:5 So Esther called for Hathach, one of the king’s eunuchs who had been placed at her service, and instructed him to find out the cause and reason for Mordecai’s behavior.
EST 4:6 So Hathach went to Mordecai at the plaza of the city in front of the king’s gate.
EST 4:7 Then Mordecai related to him everything that had happened to him, even the specific amount of money that Haman had offered to pay to the king’s treasuries for the Jews to be destroyed.
EST 4:8 He also gave him a written copy of the law that had been disseminated in Susa for their destruction so that he could show it to Esther and talk to her about it. He also gave instructions that she should go to the king to implore him and petition him on behalf of her people.
EST 4:9 So Hathach returned and related Mordecai’s instructions to Esther.
EST 4:10 Then Esther replied to Hathach with instructions for Mordecai:
EST 4:11 “All the servants of the king and the people of the king’s provinces know that there is only one law applicable to any man or woman who comes uninvited to the king in the inner court – that person will be put to death, unless the king extends to him the gold scepter, permitting him to be spared. Now I have not been invited to come to the king for some thirty days!”
EST 4:12 When Esther’s reply was conveyed to Mordecai,
EST 4:13 he said to take back this answer to Esther:
EST 4:14 “Don’t imagine that because you are part of the king’s household you will be the one Jew who will escape. If you keep quiet at this time, liberation and protection for the Jews will appear from another source, while you and your father’s household perish. It may very well be that you have achieved royal status for such a time as this!”
EST 4:15 Then Esther sent this reply to Mordecai:
EST 4:16 “Go, assemble all the Jews who are found in Susa and fast in my behalf. Don’t eat and don’t drink for three days, night or day. My female attendants and I will also fast in the same way. Afterward I will go to the king, even though it violates the law. If I perish, I perish!”
EST 4:17 So Mordecai set out to do everything that Esther had instructed him.
EST 5:1 It so happened that on the third day Esther put on her royal attire and stood in the inner court of the palace, opposite the king’s quarters. The king was sitting on his royal throne in the palace, opposite the entrance.
EST 5:2 When the king saw Queen Esther standing in the court, she met with his approval. The king extended to Esther the gold scepter that was in his hand, and Esther approached and touched the end of the scepter.
EST 5:3 The king said to her, “What is on your mind, Queen Esther? What is your request? Even as much as half the kingdom will be given to you!”
EST 5:4 Esther replied, “If the king is so inclined, let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him.”
EST 5:5 The king replied, “Find Haman quickly so that we can do as Esther requests.” So the king and Haman went to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
EST 5:6 While at the banquet of wine, the king said to Esther, “What is your request? It shall be given to you. What is your petition? Ask for as much as half the kingdom, and it shall be done!”
EST 5:7 Esther responded, “My request and my petition is this:
EST 5:8 If I have found favor in the king’s sight and if the king is inclined to grant my request and perform my petition, let the king and Haman come tomorrow to the banquet that I will prepare for them. At that time I will do as the king wishes.
EST 5:9 Now Haman went forth that day pleased and very much encouraged. But when Haman saw Mordecai at the king’s gate, and he did not rise nor tremble in his presence, Haman was filled with rage toward Mordecai.
EST 5:10 But Haman restrained himself and went on to his home. He then sent for his friends to join him, along with his wife Zeresh.
EST 5:11 Haman then recounted to them his fabulous wealth, his many sons, and how the king had magnified him and exalted him over the king’s other officials and servants.
EST 5:12 Haman said, “Furthermore, Queen Esther invited only me to accompany the king to the banquet that she prepared! And also tomorrow I am invited along with the king.
EST 5:13 Yet all of this fails to satisfy me so long as I have to see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king’s gate.”
EST 5:14 Haman’s wife Zeresh and all his friends said to him, “Have a gallows seventy-five feet high built, and in the morning tell the king that Mordecai should be hanged on it. Then go with the king to the banquet contented.” It seemed like a good idea to Haman, so he had the gallows built.
EST 6:1 Throughout that night the king was unable to sleep, so he asked for the book containing the historical records to be brought. As the records were being read in the king’s presence,
EST 6:2 it was found written that Mordecai had disclosed that Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who guarded the entrance, had plotted to assassinate King Ahasuerus.
EST 6:3 The king asked, “What great honor was bestowed on Mordecai because of this?” The king’s attendants who served him responded, “Not a thing was done for him.”
EST 6:4 Then the king said, “Who is that in the courtyard?” Now Haman had come to the outer courtyard of the palace to suggest that the king hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had constructed for him.
EST 6:5 The king’s attendants said to him, “It is Haman who is standing in the courtyard.” The king said, “Let him enter.”
EST 6:6 So Haman came in, and the king said to him, “What should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honor?” Haman thought to himself, “Who is it that the king would want to honor more than me?”
EST 6:7 So Haman said to the king, “For the man whom the king wishes to honor,
EST 6:8 let them bring royal attire which the king himself has worn and a horse on which the king himself has ridden – one bearing the royal insignia!
EST 6:9 Then let this clothing and this horse be given to one of the king’s noble officials. Let him then clothe the man whom the king wishes to honor, and let him lead him about through the plaza of the city on the horse, calling before him, ‘So shall it be done to the man whom the king wishes to honor!’”
EST 6:10 The king then said to Haman, “Go quickly! Take the clothing and the horse, just as you have described, and do as you just indicated to Mordecai the Jew who sits at the king’s gate. Don’t neglect a single thing of all that you have said.”
EST 6:11 So Haman took the clothing and the horse, and he clothed Mordecai. He led him about on the horse throughout the plaza of the city, calling before him, “So shall it be done to the man whom the king wishes to honor!”
EST 6:12 Then Mordecai again sat at the king’s gate, while Haman hurried away to his home, mournful and with a veil over his head.
EST 6:13 Haman then related to his wife Zeresh and to all his friends everything that had happened to him. These wise men, along with his wife Zeresh, said to him, “If indeed this Mordecai before whom you have begun to fall is Jewish, you will not prevail against him. No, you will surely fall before him!”
EST 6:14 While they were still speaking with him, the king’s eunuchs arrived. They quickly brought Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
EST 7:1 So the king and Haman came to dine with Queen Esther.
EST 7:2 On the second day of the banquet of wine the king asked Esther, “What is your request, Queen Esther? It shall be granted to you. And what is your petition? Ask up to half the kingdom, and it shall be done!”
EST 7:3 Queen Esther replied, “If I have met with your approval, O king, and if the king is so inclined, grant me my life as my request, and my people as my petition.
EST 7:4 For we have been sold – both I and my people – to destruction and to slaughter and to annihilation! If we had simply been sold as male and female slaves, I would have remained silent, for such distress would not have been sufficient for troubling the king.”
EST 7:5 Then King Ahasuerus responded to Queen Esther, “Who is this individual? Where is this person to be found who is presumptuous enough to act in this way?”
EST 7:6 Esther replied, “The oppressor and enemy is this evil Haman!” Then Haman became terrified in the presence of the king and queen.
EST 7:7 In rage the king arose from the banquet of wine and withdrew to the palace garden. Meanwhile, Haman stood to beg Queen Esther for his life, for he realized that the king had now determined a catastrophic end for him.
EST 7:8 When the king returned from the palace garden to the banquet of wine, Haman was throwing himself down on the couch where Esther was lying. The king exclaimed, “Will he also attempt to rape the queen while I am still in the building!” As these words left the king’s mouth, they covered Haman’s face.
EST 7:9 Harbona, one of the king’s eunuchs, said, “Indeed, there is the gallows that Haman made for Mordecai, who spoke out in the king’s behalf. It stands near Haman’s home and is seventy-five feet high.” The king said, “Hang him on it!”
EST 7:10 So they hanged Haman on the very gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. The king’s rage then abated.
EST 8:1 On that same day King Ahasuerus gave the estate of Haman, that adversary of the Jews, to Queen Esther. Now Mordecai had come before the king, for Esther had revealed how he was related to her.
EST 8:2 The king then removed his signet ring (the very one he had taken back from Haman) and gave it to Mordecai. And Esther designated Mordecai to be in charge of Haman’s estate.
EST 8:3 Then Esther again spoke with the king, falling at his feet. She wept and begged him for mercy, that he might nullify the evil of Haman the Agagite which he had intended against the Jews.
EST 8:4 When the king extended to Esther the gold scepter, she arose and stood before the king.
EST 8:5 She said, “If the king is so inclined and if I have met with his approval and if the matter is agreeable to the king and if I am attractive to him, let an edict be written rescinding those recorded intentions of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, which he wrote in order to destroy the Jews who are throughout all the king’s provinces.
EST 8:6 For how can I watch the calamity that will befall my people, and how can I watch the destruction of my relatives?”
EST 8:7 King Ahasuerus replied to Queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, “Look, I have already given Haman’s estate to Esther, and he has been hanged on the gallows because he took hostile action against the Jews.
EST 8:8 Now you write in the king’s name whatever in your opinion is appropriate concerning the Jews and seal it with the king’s signet ring. Any decree that is written in the king’s name and sealed with the king’s signet ring cannot be rescinded.
EST 8:9 The king’s scribes were quickly summoned – in the third month (that is, the month of Sivan), on the twenty-third day. They wrote out everything that Mordecai instructed to the Jews and to the satraps and the governors and the officials of the provinces all the way from India to Ethiopia – a hundred and twenty-seven provinces in all – to each province in its own script and to each people in their own language, and to the Jews according to their own script and their own language.
EST 8:10 Mordecai wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed it with the king’s signet ring. He then sent letters by couriers on horses, who rode royal horses that were very swift.
EST 8:11 The king thereby allowed the Jews who were in every city to assemble and to stand up for themselves – to destroy, to kill, and to annihilate any army of whatever people or province that should become their adversaries, including their women and children, and to confiscate their property.
EST 8:12 This was to take place on a certain day throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus – namely, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar).
EST 8:13 A copy of the edict was to be presented as law throughout each and every province and made known to all peoples, so that the Jews might be prepared on that day to avenge themselves from their enemies.
EST 8:14 The couriers who were riding the royal horses went forth with the king’s edict without delay. And the law was presented in Susa the citadel as well.
EST 8:15 Now Mordecai went out from the king’s presence in purple and white royal attire, with a large golden crown and a purple linen mantle. The city of Susa shouted with joy.
EST 8:16 For the Jews there was radiant happiness and joyous honor.
EST 8:17 Throughout every province and throughout every city where the king’s edict and his law arrived, the Jews experienced happiness and joy, banquets and holidays. Many of the resident peoples pretended to be Jews, because the fear of the Jews had overcome them.
EST 9:1 In the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar), on its thirteenth day, the edict of the king and his law were to be executed. It was on this day that the enemies of the Jews had supposed that they would gain power over them. But contrary to expectations, the Jews gained power over their enemies.
EST 9:2 The Jews assembled themselves in their cities throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus to strike out against those who were seeking their harm. No one was able to stand before them, for dread of them fell on all the peoples.
EST 9:3 All the officials of the provinces, the satraps, the governors and those who performed the king’s business were assisting the Jews, for the dread of Mordecai had fallen on them.
EST 9:4 Mordecai was of high rank in the king’s palace, and word about him was spreading throughout all the provinces. His influence continued to become greater and greater.
EST 9:5 The Jews struck all their enemies with the sword, bringing death and destruction, and they did as they pleased with their enemies.
EST 9:6 In Susa the citadel the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men.
EST 9:7 In addition, they also killed Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,
EST 9:8 Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
EST 9:9 Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha,
EST 9:10 the ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews. But they did not confiscate their property.
EST 9:11 On that same day the number of those killed in Susa the citadel was brought to the king’s attention.
EST 9:12 Then the king said to Queen Esther, “In Susa the citadel the Jews have killed and destroyed five hundred men and the ten sons of Haman! What then have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces? What is your request? It shall be given to you. What other petition do you have? It shall be done.”
EST 9:13 Esther replied, “If the king is so inclined, let the Jews who are in Susa be permitted to act tomorrow also according to today’s law, and let them hang the ten sons of Haman on the gallows.”
EST 9:14 So the king issued orders for this to be done. A law was passed in Susa, and the ten sons of Haman were hanged.
EST 9:15 The Jews who were in Susa then assembled on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar, and they killed three hundred men in Susa. But they did not confiscate their property.
EST 9:16 The rest of the Jews who were throughout the provinces of the king assembled in order to stand up for themselves and to have rest from their enemies. They killed seventy-five thousand of their adversaries, but they did not confiscate their property.
EST 9:17 All of this happened on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar. They then rested on the fourteenth day and made it a day for banqueting and happiness.
EST 9:18 But the Jews who were in Susa assembled on the thirteenth and fourteenth days, and rested on the fifteenth, making it a day for banqueting and happiness.
EST 9:19 This is why the Jews who are in the rural country – those who live in rural cities – set aside the fourteenth day of the month of Adar as a holiday for happiness, banqueting, holiday, and sending gifts to one another.
EST 9:20 Mordecai wrote these matters down and sent letters to all the Jews who were throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, both near and far,
EST 9:21 to have them observe the fourteenth and the fifteenth day of the month of Adar each year
EST 9:22 as the time when the Jews gave themselves rest from their enemies – the month when their trouble was turned to happiness and their mourning to a holiday. These were to be days of banqueting, happiness, sending gifts to one another, and providing for the poor.
EST 9:23 So the Jews committed themselves to continue what they had begun to do and to what Mordecai had written to them.
EST 9:24 For Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had devised plans against the Jews to destroy them. He had cast pur (that is, the lot) in order to afflict and destroy them.
EST 9:25 But when the matter came to the king’s attention, the king gave written orders that Haman’s evil intentions that he had devised against the Jews should fall on his own head. He and his sons were hanged on the gallows.
EST 9:26 For this reason these days are known as Purim, after the name of pur.
EST 9:27 Therefore, because of the account found in this letter and what they had faced in this regard and what had happened to them, the Jews established as binding on themselves, their descendants, and all who joined their company that they should observe these two days without fail, just as written and at the appropriate time on an annual basis.
EST 9:28 These days were to be remembered and to be celebrated in every generation and in every family, every province, and every city. The Jews were not to fail to observe these days of Purim; the remembrance of them was not to cease among their descendants.
EST 9:29 So Queen Esther, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew wrote with full authority to confirm this second letter about Purim.
EST 9:30 Letters were sent to all the Jews in the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of the empire of Ahasuerus – words of true peace –
EST 9:31 to establish these days of Purim in their proper times, just as Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther had established, and just as they had established both for themselves and their descendants, matters pertaining to fasting and lamentation.
EST 9:32 Esther’s command established these matters of Purim, and the matter was officially recorded.
EST 10:1 King Ahasuerus then imposed forced labor on the land and on the coastlands of the sea.
EST 10:2 Now all the actions carried out under his authority and his great achievements, along with an exact statement concerning the greatness of Mordecai, whom the king promoted, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia?
EST 10:3 Mordecai the Jew was second only to King Ahasuerus. He was the highest-ranking Jew, and he was admired by his numerous relatives. He worked enthusiastically for the good of his people and was an advocate for the welfare of all his descendants.
JOB 1:1 There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. And that man was pure and upright, one who feared God and turned away from evil.
JOB 1:2 Seven sons and three daughters were born to him.
JOB 1:3 His possessions included 7,000 sheep, 3,000 camels, 500 yoke of oxen, and 500 female donkeys; in addition he had a very great household. Thus he was the greatest of all the people in the east.
JOB 1:4 Now his sons used to go and hold a feast in the house of each one in turn, and they would send and invite their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
JOB 1:5 When the days of their feasting were finished, Job would send for them and sanctify them; he would get up early in the morning and offer burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job thought, “Perhaps my children have sinned and cursed God in their hearts.” This was Job’s customary practice.
JOB 1:6 Now the day came when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord – and Satan also arrived among them.
JOB 1:7 The Lord said to Satan, “Where have you come from?” And Satan answered the Lord, “From roving about on the earth, and from walking back and forth across it.”
JOB 1:8 So the Lord said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth, a pure and upright man, one who fears God and turns away from evil.”
JOB 1:9 Then Satan answered the Lord, “Is it for nothing that Job fears God?
JOB 1:10 Have you not made a hedge around him and his household and all that he has on every side? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his livestock have increased in the land.
JOB 1:11 But extend your hand and strike everything he has, and he will no doubt curse you to your face!”
JOB 1:12 So the Lord said to Satan, “All right then, everything he has is in your power. Only do not extend your hand against the man himself!” So Satan went out from the presence of the Lord.
JOB 1:13 Now the day came when Job’s sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house,
JOB 1:14 and a messenger came to Job, saying, “The oxen were plowing and the donkeys were grazing beside them,
JOB 1:15 and the Sabeans swooped down and carried them all away, and they killed the servants with the sword! And I – only I alone – escaped to tell you!”
JOB 1:16 While this one was still speaking, another messenger arrived and said, “The fire of God has fallen from heaven and has burned up the sheep and the servants – it has consumed them! And I – only I alone – escaped to tell you!”
JOB 1:17 While this one was still speaking another messenger arrived and said, “The Chaldeans formed three bands and made a raid on the camels and carried them all away, and they killed the servants with the sword! And I – only I alone – escaped to tell you!”
JOB 1:18 While this one was still speaking another messenger arrived and said, “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house,
JOB 1:19 and suddenly a great wind swept across the wilderness and struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young people, and they died! And I – only I alone – escaped to tell you!”
JOB 1:20 Then Job got up and tore his robe. He shaved his head, and then he threw himself down with his face to the ground.
JOB 1:21 He said, “Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and naked I will return there. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. May the name of the Lord be blessed!”
JOB 1:22 In all this Job did not sin, nor did he charge God with moral impropriety.
JOB 2:1 Again the day came when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan also arrived among them to present himself before the Lord.
JOB 2:2 And the Lord said to Satan, “Where do you come from?” Satan answered the Lord, “From roving about on the earth, and from walking back and forth across it.”
JOB 2:3 Then the Lord said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant Job? For there is no one like him on the earth, a pure and upright man, one who fears God and turns away from evil. And he still holds firmly to his integrity, so that you stirred me up to destroy him without reason.”
JOB 2:4 But Satan answered the Lord, “Skin for skin! Indeed, a man will give up all that he has to save his life!
JOB 2:5 But extend your hand and strike his bone and his flesh, and he will no doubt curse you to your face!”
JOB 2:6 So the Lord said to Satan, “All right, he is in your power; only preserve his life.”
JOB 2:7 So Satan went out from the presence of the Lord, and he afflicted Job with a malignant ulcer from the sole of his feet to the top of his head.
JOB 2:8 Job took a shard of broken pottery to scrape himself with while he was sitting among the ashes.
JOB 2:9 Then his wife said to him, “Are you still holding firmly to your integrity? Curse God, and die!”
JOB 2:10 But he replied, “You’re talking like one of the godless women would do! Should we receive what is good from God, and not also receive what is evil?” In all this Job did not sin by what he said.
JOB 2:11 When Job’s three friends heard about all this calamity that had happened to him, each of them came from his own country – Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. They met together to come to show sympathy for him and to console him.
JOB 2:12 But when they gazed intently from a distance but did not recognize him, they began to weep loudly. Each of them tore his robes, and they threw dust into the air over their heads.
JOB 2:13 Then they sat down with him on the ground for seven days and seven nights, yet no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.
JOB 3:1 After this Job opened his mouth and cursed the day he was born.
JOB 3:2 Job spoke up and said:
JOB 3:3 “Let the day on which I was born perish, and the night that said, ‘A man has been conceived!’
JOB 3:4 That day – let it be darkness; let not God on high regard it, nor let light shine on it!
JOB 3:5 Let darkness and the deepest shadow claim it; let a cloud settle on it; let whatever blackens the day terrify it!
JOB 3:6 That night – let darkness seize it; let it not be included among the days of the year; let it not enter among the number of the months!
JOB 3:7 Indeed, let that night be barren; let no shout of joy penetrate it!
JOB 3:8 Let those who curse the day curse it – those who are prepared to rouse Leviathan.
JOB 3:9 Let its morning stars be darkened; let it wait for daylight but find none, nor let it see the first rays of dawn,
JOB 3:10 because it did not shut the doors of my mother’s womb on me, nor did it hide trouble from my eyes!
JOB 3:11 “Why did I not die at birth, and why did I not expire as I came out of the womb?
JOB 3:12 Why did the knees welcome me, and why were there two breasts that I might nurse at them?
JOB 3:13 For now I would be lying down and would be quiet, I would be asleep and then at peace
JOB 3:14 with kings and counselors of the earth who built for themselves places now desolate,
JOB 3:15 or with princes who possessed gold, who filled their palaces with silver.
JOB 3:16 Or why was I not buried like a stillborn infant, like infants who have never seen the light?
JOB 3:17 There the wicked cease from turmoil, and there the weary are at rest.
JOB 3:18 There the prisoners relax together; they do not hear the voice of the oppressor.
JOB 3:19 Small and great are there, and the slave is free from his master.
JOB 3:20 “Why does God give light to one who is in misery, and life to those whose soul is bitter,
JOB 3:21 to those who wait for death that does not come, and search for it more than for hidden treasures,
JOB 3:22 who rejoice even to jubilation, and are exultant when they find the grave?
JOB 3:23 Why is light given to a man whose way is hidden, and whom God has hedged in?
JOB 3:24 For my sighing comes in place of my food, and my groanings flow forth like water.
JOB 3:25 For the very thing I dreaded has happened to me, and what I feared has come upon me.
JOB 3:26 I have no ease, I have no quietness; I cannot rest; turmoil has come upon me.”
JOB 4:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered:
JOB 4:2 “If someone should attempt a word with you, will you be impatient? But who can refrain from speaking ?
JOB 4:3 Look, you have instructed many; you have strengthened feeble hands.
JOB 4:4 Your words have supported those who stumbled, and you have strengthened the knees that gave way.
JOB 4:5 But now the same thing comes to you, and you are discouraged; it strikes you, and you are terrified.
JOB 4:6 Is not your piety your confidence, and your blameless ways your hope?
JOB 4:7 Call to mind now: Who, being innocent, ever perished? And where were upright people ever destroyed?
JOB 4:8 Even as I have seen, those who plow iniquity and those who sow trouble reap the same.
JOB 4:9 By the breath of God they perish, and by the blast of his anger they are consumed.
JOB 4:10 There is the roaring of the lion and the growling of the young lion, but the teeth of the young lions are broken.
JOB 4:11 The mighty lion perishes for lack of prey, and the cubs of the lioness are scattered.
JOB 4:12 “Now a word was secretly brought to me, and my ear caught a whisper of it.
JOB 4:13 In the troubling thoughts of the dreams in the night when a deep sleep falls on men,
JOB 4:14 a trembling gripped me – and a terror! – and made all my bones shake.
JOB 4:15 Then a breath of air passes by my face; it makes the hair of my flesh stand up.
JOB 4:16 It stands still, but I cannot recognize its appearance; an image is before my eyes, and I hear a murmuring voice:
JOB 4:17 “Is a mortal man righteous before God? Or a man pure before his Creator?
JOB 4:18 If God puts no trust in his servants and attributes folly to his angels,
JOB 4:19 how much more to those who live in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed like a moth?
JOB 4:20 They are destroyed between morning and evening; they perish forever without anyone regarding it.
JOB 4:21 Is not their excess wealth taken away from them? They die, yet without attaining wisdom.
JOB 5:1 “Call now! Is there anyone who will answer you? To which of the holy ones will you turn?
JOB 5:2 For wrath kills the foolish person, and anger slays the silly one.
JOB 5:3 I myself have seen the fool taking root, but suddenly I cursed his place of residence.
JOB 5:4 His children are far from safety, and they are crushed at the place where judgment is rendered, nor is there anyone to deliver them.
JOB 5:5 The hungry eat up his harvest, and take it even from behind the thorns, and the thirsty swallow up their fortune.
JOB 5:6 For evil does not come up from the dust, nor does trouble spring up from the ground,
JOB 5:7 but people are born to trouble, as surely as the sparks fly upward.
JOB 5:8 “But as for me, I would seek God, and to God I would set forth my case.
JOB 5:9 He does great and unsearchable things, marvelous things without number;
JOB 5:10 he gives rain on the earth, and sends water on the fields;
JOB 5:11 he sets the lowly on high, that those who mourn are raised to safety.
JOB 5:12 He frustrates the plans of the crafty so that their hands cannot accomplish what they had planned!
JOB 5:13 He catches the wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the cunning is brought to a quick end.
JOB 5:14 They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope about in the noontime as if it were night.
JOB 5:15 So he saves from the sword that comes from their mouth, even the poor from the hand of the powerful.
JOB 5:16 Thus the poor have hope, and iniquity shuts its mouth.
JOB 5:17 “Therefore, blessed is the man whom God corrects, so do not despise the discipline of the Almighty.
JOB 5:18 For he wounds, but he also bandages; he strikes, but his hands also heal.
JOB 5:19 He will deliver you from six calamities; yes, in seven no evil will touch you.
JOB 5:20 In time of famine he will redeem you from death, and in time of war from the power of the sword.
JOB 5:21 You will be protected from malicious gossip, and will not be afraid of the destruction when it comes.
JOB 5:22 You will laugh at destruction and famine and need not be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
JOB 5:23 For you will have a pact with the stones of the field, and the wild animals will be at peace with you.
JOB 5:24 And you will know that your home will be secure, and when you inspect your domains, you will not be missing anything.
JOB 5:25 You will also know that your children will be numerous, and your descendants like the grass of the earth.
JOB 5:26 You will come to your grave in a full age, As stacks of grain are harvested in their season.
JOB 5:27 Look, we have investigated this, so it is true. Hear it, and apply it for your own good.”
JOB 6:1 Then Job responded:
JOB 6:2 “Oh, if only my grief could be weighed, and my misfortune laid on the scales too!
JOB 6:3 But because it is heavier than the sand of the sea, that is why my words have been wild.
JOB 6:4 For the arrows of the Almighty are within me; my spirit drinks their poison; God’s sudden terrors are arrayed against me.
JOB 6:5 “Does the wild donkey bray when it is near grass? Or does the ox low near its fodder?
JOB 6:6 Can food that is tasteless be eaten without salt? Or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
JOB 6:7 I have refused to touch such things; they are like loathsome food to me.
JOB 6:8 “Oh that my request would be realized, and that God would grant me what I long for!
JOB 6:9 And that God would be willing to crush me, that he would let loose his hand and kill me.
JOB 6:10 Then I would yet have my comfort, then I would rejoice, in spite of pitiless pain, for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One.
JOB 6:11 What is my strength, that I should wait? and what is my end, that I should prolong my life?
JOB 6:12 Is my strength like that of stones? or is my flesh made of bronze?
JOB 6:13 Is not my power to help myself nothing, and has not every resource been driven from me?
JOB 6:14 “To the one in despair, kindness should come from his friend even if he forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
JOB 6:15 My brothers have been as treacherous as a seasonal stream, and as the riverbeds of the intermittent streams that flow away.
JOB 6:16 They are dark because of ice; snow is piled up over them.
JOB 6:17 When they are scorched, they dry up, when it is hot, they vanish from their place.
JOB 6:18 Caravans turn aside from their routes; they go into the wasteland and perish.
JOB 6:19 The caravans of Tema looked intently for these streams; the traveling merchants of Sheba hoped for them.
JOB 6:20 They were distressed, because each one had been so confident; they arrived there, but were disappointed.
JOB 6:21 For now you have become like these streams that are no help; you see a terror, and are afraid.
JOB 6:22 “Have I ever said, ‘Give me something, and from your fortune make gifts in my favor’?
JOB 6:23 Or ‘Deliver me from the enemy’s power, and from the hand of tyrants ransom me’?
JOB 6:24 “Teach me and I, for my part, will be silent; explain to me how I have been mistaken.
JOB 6:25 How painful are honest words! But what does your reproof prove?
JOB 6:26 Do you intend to criticize mere words, and treat the words of a despairing man as wind?
JOB 6:27 Yes, you would gamble for the fatherless, and auction off your friend.
JOB 6:28 “Now then, be good enough to look at me; and I will not lie to your face!
JOB 6:29 Relent, let there be no falsehood; reconsider, for my righteousness is intact!
JOB 6:30 Is there any falsehood on my lips? Can my mouth not discern evil things?
JOB 7:1 “Does not humanity have hard service on earth? Are not their days also like the days of a hired man?
JOB 7:2 Like a servant longing for the evening shadow, and like a hired man looking for his wages,
JOB 7:3 thus I have been made to inherit months of futility, and nights of sorrow have been appointed to me.
JOB 7:4 If I lie down, I say, ‘When will I arise?’, and the night stretches on and I toss and turn restlessly until the day dawns.
JOB 7:5 My body is clothed with worms and dirty scabs; my skin is broken and festering.
JOB 7:6 My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle and they come to an end without hope.
JOB 7:7 Remember that my life is but a breath, that my eyes will never again see happiness.
JOB 7:8 The eye of him who sees me now will see me no more; your eyes will look for me, but I will be gone.
JOB 7:9 As a cloud is dispersed and then disappears, so the one who goes down to the grave does not come up again.
JOB 7:10 He returns no more to his house, nor does his place of residence know him any more.
JOB 7:11 “Therefore, I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
JOB 7:12 Am I the sea, or the creature of the deep, that you must put me under guard?
JOB 7:13 If I say, “My bed will comfort me, my couch will ease my complaint,”
JOB 7:14 then you scare me with dreams and terrify me with visions,
JOB 7:15 so that I would prefer strangling, and death more than life.
JOB 7:16 I loathe it; I do not want to live forever; leave me alone, for my days are a vapor!
JOB 7:17 “What is mankind that you make so much of them, and that you pay attention to them?
JOB 7:18 And that you visit them every morning, and try them every moment?
JOB 7:19 Will you never look away from me, will you not let me alone long enough to swallow my spittle?
JOB 7:20 If I have sinned – what have I done to you, O watcher of men? Why have you set me as your target? Have I become a burden to you?
JOB 7:21 And why do you not pardon my transgression, and take away my iniquity? For now I will lie down in the dust, and you will seek me diligently, but I will be gone.”
JOB 8:1 Then Bildad the Shuhite spoke up and said:
JOB 8:2 “How long will you speak these things, seeing that the words of your mouth are like a great wind?
JOB 8:3 Does God pervert justice? Or does the Almighty pervert what is right?
JOB 8:4 If your children sinned against him, he gave them over to the penalty of their sin.
JOB 8:5 But if you will look to God, and make your supplication to the Almighty,
JOB 8:6 if you become pure and upright, even now he will rouse himself for you, and will restore your righteous abode.
JOB 8:7 Your beginning will seem so small, since your future will flourish.
JOB 8:8 “For inquire now of the former generation, and pay attention to the findings of their ancestors;
JOB 8:9 For we were born yesterday and do not have knowledge, since our days on earth are but a shadow.
JOB 8:10 Will they not instruct you and speak to you, and bring forth words from their understanding?
JOB 8:11 Can the papyrus plant grow tall where there is no marsh? Can reeds flourish without water?
JOB 8:12 While they are still beginning to flower and not ripe for cutting, they can wither away faster than any grass!
JOB 8:13 Such is the destiny of all who forget God; the hope of the godless perishes,
JOB 8:14 whose trust is in something futile, whose security is a spider’s web.
JOB 8:15 He leans against his house but it does not hold up, he takes hold of it but it does not stand.
JOB 8:16 He is a well-watered plant in the sun, its shoots spread over its garden.
JOB 8:17 It wraps its roots around a heap of stones and it looks for a place among stones.
JOB 8:18 If he is uprooted from his place, then that place will disown him, saying, ‘I have never seen you!’
JOB 8:19 Indeed, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth others spring up.
JOB 8:20 “Surely, God does not reject a blameless man, nor does he grasp the hand of the evildoers.
JOB 8:21 He will yet fill your mouth with laughter, and your lips with gladness.
JOB 8:22 Those who hate you will be clothed with shame, and the tent of the wicked will be no more.”
JOB 9:1 Then Job answered:
JOB 9:2 “Truly, I know that this is so. But how can a human be just before God?
JOB 9:3 If someone wishes to contend with him, he cannot answer him one time in a thousand.
JOB 9:4 He is wise in heart and mighty in strength – who has resisted him and remained safe?
JOB 9:5 He who removes mountains suddenly, who overturns them in his anger;
JOB 9:6 he who shakes the earth out of its place so that its pillars tremble;
JOB 9:7 he who commands the sun and it does not shine and seals up the stars;
JOB 9:8 he alone spreads out the heavens, and treads on the waves of the sea;
JOB 9:9 he makes the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, and the constellations of the southern sky;
JOB 9:10 he does great and unsearchable things, and wonderful things without number.
JOB 9:11 If he passes by me, I cannot see him, if he goes by, I cannot perceive him.
JOB 9:12 If he snatches away, who can turn him back? Who dares to say to him, ‘What are you doing?’
JOB 9:13 God does not restrain his anger; under him the helpers of Rahab lie crushed.
JOB 9:14 “How much less, then, can I answer him and choose my words to argue with him!
JOB 9:15 Although I am innocent, I could not answer him; I could only plead with my judge for mercy.
JOB 9:16 If I summoned him, and he answered me, I would not believe that he would be listening to my voice –
JOB 9:17 he who crushes me with a tempest, and multiplies my wounds for no reason.
JOB 9:18 He does not allow me to recover my breath, for he fills me with bitterness.
JOB 9:19 If it is a matter of strength, most certainly he is the strong one! And if it is a matter of justice, he will say, ‘Who will summon me?’
JOB 9:20 Although I am innocent, my mouth would condemn me; although I am blameless, it would declare me perverse.
JOB 9:21 I am blameless. I do not know myself. I despise my life.
JOB 9:22 “It is all one! That is why I say, ‘He destroys the blameless and the guilty.’
JOB 9:23 If a scourge brings sudden death, he mocks at the despair of the innocent.
JOB 9:24 If a land has been given into the hand of a wicked man, he covers the faces of its judges; if it is not he, then who is it?
JOB 9:25 “My days are swifter than a runner, they speed by without seeing happiness.
JOB 9:26 They glide by like reed boats, like an eagle that swoops down on its prey.
JOB 9:27 If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint, I will change my expression and be cheerful,’
JOB 9:28 I dread all my sufferings, for I know that you do not hold me blameless.
JOB 9:29 If I am guilty, why then weary myself in vain?
JOB 9:30 If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands clean with lye,
JOB 9:31 then you plunge me into a slimy pit and my own clothes abhor me.
JOB 9:32 For he is not a human being like I am, that I might answer him, that we might come together in judgment.
JOB 9:33 Nor is there an arbiter between us, who might lay his hand on us both,
JOB 9:34 who would take his rod away from me so that his terror would not make me afraid.
JOB 9:35 Then would I speak and not fear him, but it is not so with me.
JOB 10:1 “I am weary of my life; I will complain without restraint; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
JOB 10:2 I will say to God, ‘Do not condemn me; tell me why you are contending with me.’
JOB 10:3 Is it good for you to oppress, to despise the work of your hands, while you smile on the schemes of the wicked?
JOB 10:4 “Do you have eyes of flesh, or do you see as a human being sees?
JOB 10:5 Are your days like the days of a mortal, or your years like the years of a mortal,
JOB 10:6 that you must search out my iniquity, and inquire about my sin,
JOB 10:7 although you know that I am not guilty, and that there is no one who can deliver out of your hand?
JOB 10:8 “Your hands have shaped me and made me, but now you destroy me completely.
JOB 10:9 Remember that you have made me as with the clay; will you return me to dust?
JOB 10:10 Did you not pour me out like milk, and curdle me like cheese?
JOB 10:11 You clothed me with skin and flesh and knit me together with bones and sinews.
JOB 10:12 You gave me life and favor, and your intervention watched over my spirit.
JOB 10:13 “But these things you have concealed in your heart; I know that this is with you:
JOB 10:14 If I sinned, then you would watch me and you would not acquit me of my iniquity.
JOB 10:15 If I am guilty, woe to me, and if I am innocent, I cannot lift my head; I am full of shame, and satiated with my affliction.
JOB 10:16 If I lift myself up, you hunt me as a fierce lion, and again you display your power against me.
JOB 10:17 You bring new witnesses against me, and increase your anger against me; relief troops come against me.
JOB 10:18 “Why then did you bring me out from the womb? I should have died and no eye would have seen me!
JOB 10:19 I should have been as though I had never existed; I should have been carried right from the womb to the grave!
JOB 10:20 Are not my days few? Cease, then, and leave me alone, that I may find a little comfort,
JOB 10:21 before I depart, never to return, to the land of darkness and the deepest shadow,
JOB 10:22 to the land of utter darkness, like the deepest darkness, and the deepest shadow and disorder, where even the light is like darkness.”
JOB 11:1 Then Zophar the Naamathite spoke up and said:
JOB 11:2 “Should not this abundance of words be answered, or should this talkative man be vindicated?
JOB 11:3 Will your idle talk reduce people to silence, and will no one rebuke you when you mock?
JOB 11:4 For you have said, ‘My teaching is flawless, and I am pure in your sight.’
JOB 11:5 But if only God would speak, if only he would open his lips against you,
JOB 11:6 and reveal to you the secrets of wisdom – for true wisdom has two sides – so that you would know that God has forgiven some of your sins.
JOB 11:7 “Can you discover the essence of God? Can you find out the perfection of the Almighty?
JOB 11:8 It is higher than the heavens – what can you do? It is deeper than Sheol – what can you know?
JOB 11:9 Its measure is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
JOB 11:10 If he comes by and confines you and convenes a court, then who can prevent him?
JOB 11:11 For he knows deceitful men; when he sees evil, will he not consider it?
JOB 11:12 But an empty man will become wise, when a wild donkey’s colt is born a human being.
JOB 11:13 “As for you, if you prove faithful, and if you stretch out your hands toward him,
JOB 11:14 if iniquity is in your hand – put it far away, and do not let evil reside in your tents.
JOB 11:15 For then you will lift up your face without blemish; you will be securely established and will not fear.
JOB 11:16 For you will forget your trouble; you will remember it like water that has flowed away.
JOB 11:17 And life will be brighter than the noonday; though there be darkness, it will be like the morning.
JOB 11:18 And you will be secure, because there is hope; you will be protected and will take your rest in safety.
JOB 11:19 You will lie down with no one to make you afraid, and many will seek your favor.
JOB 11:20 But the eyes of the wicked fail, and escape eludes them; their one hope is to breathe their last.”
JOB 12:1 Then Job answered:
JOB 12:2 “Without a doubt you are the people, and wisdom will die with you.
JOB 12:3 I also have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you. Who does not know such things as these?
JOB 12:4 I am a laughingstock to my friends, I, who called on God and whom he answered – a righteous and blameless man is a laughingstock!
JOB 12:5 For calamity, there is derision (according to the ideas of the fortunate ) – a fate for those whose feet slip!
JOB 12:6 But the tents of robbers are peaceful, and those who provoke God are confident – who carry their god in their hands.
JOB 12:7 “But now, ask the animals and they will teach you, or the birds of the sky and they will tell you.
JOB 12:8 Or speak to the earth and it will teach you, or let the fish of the sea declare to you.
JOB 12:9 Which of all these does not know that the hand of the Lord has done this,
JOB 12:10 in whose hand is the life of every creature and the breath of all the human race.
JOB 12:11 Does not the ear test words, as the tongue tastes food?
JOB 12:12 Is not wisdom found among the aged? Does not long life bring understanding?
JOB 12:13 “With God are wisdom and power; counsel and understanding are his.
JOB 12:14 If he tears down, it cannot be rebuilt; if he imprisons a person, there is no escape.
JOB 12:15 If he holds back the waters, then they dry up; if he releases them, they destroy the land.
JOB 12:16 With him are strength and prudence; both the one who goes astray and the one who misleads are his.
JOB 12:17 He leads counselors away stripped and makes judges into fools.
JOB 12:18 He loosens the bonds of kings and binds a loincloth around their waist.
JOB 12:19 He leads priests away stripped and overthrows the potentates.
JOB 12:20 He deprives the trusted advisers of speech and takes away the discernment of elders.
JOB 12:21 He pours contempt on noblemen and disarms the powerful.
JOB 12:22 He reveals the deep things of darkness, and brings deep shadows into the light.
JOB 12:23 He makes nations great, and destroys them; he extends the boundaries of nations and disperses them.
JOB 12:24 He deprives the leaders of the earth of their understanding; he makes them wander in a trackless desert waste.
JOB 12:25 They grope about in darkness without light; he makes them stagger like drunkards.
JOB 13:1 “Indeed, my eyes have seen all this, my ears have heard and understood it.
JOB 13:2 What you know, I know also; I am not inferior to you!
JOB 13:3 But I wish to speak to the Almighty, and I desire to argue my case with God.
JOB 13:4 But you, however, are inventors of lies; all of you are worthless physicians!
JOB 13:5 If only you would keep completely silent! For you, that would be wisdom.
JOB 13:6 “Listen now to my argument, and be attentive to my lips’ contentions.
JOB 13:7 Will you speak wickedly on God’s behalf? Will you speak deceitfully for him?
JOB 13:8 Will you show him partiality? Will you argue the case for God?
JOB 13:9 Would it turn out well if he would examine you? Or as one deceives a man would you deceive him?
JOB 13:10 He would certainly rebuke you if you secretly showed partiality!
JOB 13:11 Would not his splendor terrify you and the fear he inspires fall on you?
JOB 13:12 Your maxims are proverbs of ashes; your defenses are defenses of clay.
JOB 13:13 “Refrain from talking with me so that I may speak; then let come to me what may.
JOB 13:14 Why do I put myself in peril, and take my life in my hands?
JOB 13:15 Even if he slays me, I will hope in him; I will surely defend my ways to his face!
JOB 13:16 Moreover, this will become my deliverance, for no godless person would come before him.
JOB 13:17 Listen carefully to my words; let your ears be attentive to my explanation.
JOB 13:18 See now, I have prepared my case; I know that I am right.
JOB 13:19 Who will contend with me? If anyone can, I will be silent and die.
JOB 13:20 Only in two things spare me, O God, and then I will not hide from your face:
JOB 13:21 Remove your hand far from me and stop making me afraid with your terror.
JOB 13:22 Then call, and I will answer, or I will speak, and you respond to me.
JOB 13:23 How many are my iniquities and sins? Show me my transgression and my sin.
JOB 13:24 Why do you hide your face and regard me as your enemy?
JOB 13:25 Do you wish to torment a windblown leaf and chase after dry chaff?
JOB 13:26 For you write down bitter things against me and cause me to inherit the sins of my youth.
JOB 13:27 And you put my feet in the stocks and you watch all my movements; you put marks on the soles of my feet.
JOB 13:28 So I waste away like something rotten, like a garment eaten by moths.
JOB 14:1 “Man, born of woman, lives but a few days, and they are full of trouble.
JOB 14:2 He grows up like a flower and then withers away; he flees like a shadow, and does not remain.
JOB 14:3 Do you fix your eye on such a one? And do you bring me before you for judgment?
JOB 14:4 Who can make a clean thing come from an unclean? No one!
JOB 14:5 Since man’s days are determined, the number of his months is under your control; you have set his limit and he cannot pass it.
JOB 14:6 Look away from him and let him desist, until he fulfills his time like a hired man.
JOB 14:7 “But there is hope for a tree: If it is cut down, it will sprout again, and its new shoots will not fail.
JOB 14:8 Although its roots may grow old in the ground and its stump begins to die in the soil,
JOB 14:9 at the scent of water it will flourish and put forth shoots like a new plant.
JOB 14:10 But man dies and is powerless; he expires – and where is he?
JOB 14:11 As water disappears from the sea, or a river drains away and dries up,
JOB 14:12 so man lies down and does not rise; until the heavens are no more, they will not awake nor arise from their sleep.
JOB 14:13 “O that you would hide me in Sheol, and conceal me till your anger has passed! O that you would set me a time and then remember me!
JOB 14:14 If a man dies, will he live again? All the days of my hard service I will wait until my release comes.
JOB 14:15 You will call and I – I will answer you; you will long for the creature you have made.
JOB 14:16 “Surely now you count my steps; then you would not mark my sin.
JOB 14:17 My offenses would be sealed up in a bag; you would cover over my sin.
JOB 14:18 But as a mountain falls away and crumbles, and as a rock will be removed from its place,
JOB 14:19 as water wears away stones, and torrents wash away the soil, so you destroy man’s hope.
JOB 14:20 You overpower him once for all, and he departs; you change his appearance and send him away.
JOB 14:21 If his sons are honored, he does not know it; if they are brought low, he does not see it.
JOB 14:22 Only his flesh has pain for himself, and he mourns for himself.”
JOB 15:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered:
JOB 15:2 “Does a wise man answer with blustery knowledge, or fill his belly with the east wind?
JOB 15:3 Does he argue with useless talk, with words that have no value in them?
JOB 15:4 But you even break off piety, and hinder meditation before God.
JOB 15:5 Your sin inspires your mouth; you choose the language of the crafty.
JOB 15:6 Your own mouth condemns you, not I; your own lips testify against you.
JOB 15:7 “Were you the first man ever born? Were you brought forth before the hills?
JOB 15:8 Do you listen in on God’s secret council? Do you limit wisdom to yourself?
JOB 15:9 What do you know that we don’t know? What do you understand that we don’t understand?
JOB 15:10 The gray-haired and the aged are on our side, men far older than your father.
JOB 15:11 Are God’s consolations too trivial for you; or a word spoken in gentleness to you?
JOB 15:12 Why has your heart carried you away, and why do your eyes flash,
JOB 15:13 when you turn your rage against God and allow such words to escape from your mouth?
JOB 15:14 What is man that he should be pure, or one born of woman, that he should be righteous?
JOB 15:15 If God places no trust in his holy ones, if even the heavens are not pure in his eyes,
JOB 15:16 how much less man, who is abominable and corrupt, who drinks in evil like water!
JOB 15:17 “I will explain to you; listen to me, and what I have seen, I will declare,
JOB 15:18 what wise men declare, hiding nothing, from the tradition of their ancestors,
JOB 15:19 to whom alone the land was given when no foreigner passed among them.
JOB 15:20 All his days the wicked man suffers torment, throughout the number of the years that are stored up for the tyrant.
JOB 15:21 Terrifying sounds fill his ears; in a time of peace marauders attack him.
JOB 15:22 He does not expect to escape from darkness; he is marked for the sword;
JOB 15:23 he wanders about – food for vultures; he knows that the day of darkness is at hand.
JOB 15:24 Distress and anguish terrify him; they prevail against him like a king ready to launch an attack,
JOB 15:25 for he stretches out his hand against God, and vaunts himself against the Almighty,
JOB 15:26 defiantly charging against him with a thick, strong shield!
JOB 15:27 Because he covered his face with fat, and made his hips bulge with fat,
JOB 15:28 he lived in ruined towns and in houses where no one lives, where they are ready to crumble into heaps.
JOB 15:29 He will not grow rich, and his wealth will not endure, nor will his possessions spread over the land.
JOB 15:30 He will not escape the darkness; a flame will wither his shoots and he will depart by the breath of God’s mouth.
JOB 15:31 Let him not trust in what is worthless, deceiving himself; for worthlessness will be his reward.
JOB 15:32 Before his time he will be paid in full, and his branches will not flourish.
JOB 15:33 Like a vine he will let his sour grapes fall, and like an olive tree he will shed his blossoms.
JOB 15:34 For the company of the godless is barren, and fire consumes the tents of those who accept bribes.
JOB 15:35 They conceive trouble and bring forth evil; their belly prepares deception.”
JOB 16:1 Then Job replied:
JOB 16:2 “I have heard many things like these before. What miserable comforters are you all!
JOB 16:3 Will there be an end to your windy words? Or what provokes you that you answer?
JOB 16:4 I also could speak like you, if you were in my place; I could pile up words against you and I could shake my head at you.
JOB 16:5 But I would strengthen you with my words; comfort from my lips would bring you relief.
JOB 16:6 “But if I speak, my pain is not relieved, and if I refrain from speaking – how much of it goes away?
JOB 16:7 Surely now he has worn me out, you have devastated my entire household.
JOB 16:8 You have seized me, and it has become a witness; my leanness has risen up against me and testifies against me.
JOB 16:9 His anger has torn me and persecuted me; he has gnashed at me with his teeth; my adversary locks his eyes on me.
JOB 16:10 People have opened their mouths against me, they have struck my cheek in scorn; they unite together against me.
JOB 16:11 God abandons me to evil men, and throws me into the hands of wicked men.
JOB 16:12 I was in peace, and he has shattered me. He has seized me by the neck and crushed me. He has made me his target;
JOB 16:13 his archers surround me. Without pity he pierces my kidneys and pours out my gall on the ground.
JOB 16:14 He breaks through against me, time and time again; he rushes against me like a warrior.
JOB 16:15 I have sewed sackcloth on my skin, and buried my horn in the dust;
JOB 16:16 my face is reddened because of weeping, and on my eyelids there is a deep darkness,
JOB 16:17 although there is no violence in my hands and my prayer is pure.
JOB 16:18 “O earth, do not cover my blood, nor let there be a secret place for my cry.
JOB 16:19 Even now my witness is in heaven; my advocate is on high.
JOB 16:20 My intercessor is my friend as my eyes pour out tears to God;
JOB 16:21 and he contends with God on behalf of man as a man pleads for his friend.
JOB 16:22 For the years that lie ahead are few, and then I will go on the way of no return.
JOB 17:1 My spirit is broken, my days have faded out, the grave awaits me.
JOB 17:2 Surely mockery is with me; my eyes must dwell on their hostility.
JOB 17:3 Make then my pledge with you. Who else will put up security for me?
JOB 17:4 Because you have closed their minds to understanding, therefore you will not exalt them.
JOB 17:5 If a man denounces his friends for personal gain, the eyes of his children will fail.
JOB 17:6 He has made me a byword to people, I am the one in whose face they spit.
JOB 17:7 My eyes have grown dim with grief; my whole frame is but a shadow.
JOB 17:8 Upright men are appalled at this; the innocent man is troubled with the godless.
JOB 17:9 But the righteous man holds to his way, and the one with clean hands grows stronger.
JOB 17:10 “But turn, all of you, and come now! I will not find a wise man among you.
JOB 17:11 My days have passed, my plans are shattered, even the desires of my heart.
JOB 17:12 These men change night into day; they say, ‘The light is near in the face of darkness.’
JOB 17:13 If I hope for the grave to be my home, if I spread out my bed in darkness,
JOB 17:14 If I cry to corruption, ‘You are my father,’ and to the worm, ‘My Mother,’ or ‘My sister,’
JOB 17:15 where then is my hope? And my hope, who sees it?
JOB 17:16 Will it go down to the barred gates of death? Will we descend together into the dust?”
JOB 18:1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered:
JOB 18:2 “How long until you make an end of words? You must consider, and then we can talk.
JOB 18:3 Why should we be regarded as beasts, and considered stupid in your sight?
JOB 18:4 You who tear yourself to pieces in your anger, will the earth be abandoned for your sake? Or will a rock be moved from its place?
JOB 18:5 “Yes, the lamp of the wicked is extinguished; his flame of fire does not shine.
JOB 18:6 The light in his tent grows dark; his lamp above him is extinguished.
JOB 18:7 His vigorous steps are restricted, and his own counsel throws him down.
JOB 18:8 For he has been thrown into a net by his feet and he wanders into a mesh.
JOB 18:9 A trap seizes him by the heel; a snare grips him.
JOB 18:10 A rope is hidden for him on the ground and a trap for him lies on the path.
JOB 18:11 Terrors frighten him on all sides and dog his every step.
JOB 18:12 Calamity is hungry for him, and misfortune is ready at his side.
JOB 18:13 It eats away parts of his skin; the most terrible death devours his limbs.
JOB 18:14 He is dragged from the security of his tent, and marched off to the king of terrors.
JOB 18:15 Fire resides in his tent; over his residence burning sulfur is scattered.
JOB 18:16 Below his roots dry up, and his branches wither above.
JOB 18:17 His memory perishes from the earth, he has no name in the land.
JOB 18:18 He is driven from light into darkness and is banished from the world.
JOB 18:19 He has neither children nor descendants among his people, no survivor in those places he once stayed.
JOB 18:20 People of the west are appalled at his fate; people of the east are seized with horror, saying,
JOB 18:21 ‘Surely such is the residence of an evil man; and this is the place of one who has not known God.’”
JOB 19:1 Then Job answered:
JOB 19:2 “How long will you torment me and crush me with your words?
JOB 19:3 These ten times you have been reproaching me; you are not ashamed to attack me!
JOB 19:4 But even if it were true that I have erred, my error remains solely my concern!
JOB 19:5 If indeed you would exalt yourselves above me and plead my disgrace against me,
JOB 19:6 know then that God has wronged me and encircled me with his net.
JOB 19:7 “If I cry out, ‘Violence!’ I receive no answer; I cry for help, but there is no justice.
JOB 19:8 He has blocked my way so I cannot pass, and has set darkness over my paths.
JOB 19:9 He has stripped me of my honor and has taken the crown off my head.
JOB 19:10 He tears me down on every side until I perish; he uproots my hope like one uproots a tree.
JOB 19:11 Thus his anger burns against me, and he considers me among his enemies.
JOB 19:12 His troops advance together; they throw up a siege ramp against me, and they camp around my tent.
JOB 19:13 “He has put my relatives far from me; my acquaintances only turn away from me.
JOB 19:14 My kinsmen have failed me; my friends have forgotten me.
JOB 19:15 My guests and my servant girls consider me a stranger; I am a foreigner in their eyes.
JOB 19:16 I summon my servant, but he does not respond, even though I implore him with my own mouth.
JOB 19:17 My breath is repulsive to my wife; I am loathsome to my brothers.
JOB 19:18 Even youngsters have scorned me; when I get up, they scoff at me.
JOB 19:19 All my closest friends detest me; and those whom I love have turned against me.
JOB 19:20 My bones stick to my skin and my flesh; I have escaped alive with only the skin of my teeth.
JOB 19:21 Have pity on me, my friends, have pity on me, for the hand of God has struck me.
JOB 19:22 Why do you pursue me like God does? Will you never be satiated with my flesh?
JOB 19:23 “O that my words were written down, O that they were written on a scroll,
JOB 19:24 that with an iron chisel and with lead they were engraved in a rock forever!
JOB 19:25 As for me, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that as the last he will stand upon the earth.
JOB 19:26 And after my skin has been destroyed, yet in my flesh I will see God,
JOB 19:27 whom I will see for myself, and whom my own eyes will behold, and not another. My heart grows faint within me.
JOB 19:28 If you say, ‘How we will pursue him, since the root of the trouble is found in him!’
JOB 19:29 Fear the sword yourselves, for wrath brings the punishment by the sword, so that you may know that there is judgment.”
JOB 20:1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered:
JOB 20:2 “This is why my troubled thoughts bring me back – because of my feelings within me.
JOB 20:3 When I hear a reproof that dishonors me, then my understanding prompts me to answer.
JOB 20:4 “Surely you know that it has been from old, ever since humankind was placed on the earth,
JOB 20:5 that the elation of the wicked is brief, the joy of the godless lasts but a moment.
JOB 20:6 Even though his stature reaches to the heavens and his head touches the clouds,
JOB 20:7 he will perish forever, like his own excrement; those who used to see him will say, ‘Where is he?’
JOB 20:8 Like a dream he flies away, never again to be found, and like a vision of the night he is put to flight.
JOB 20:9 People who had seen him will not see him again, and the place where he was will recognize him no longer.
JOB 20:10 His sons must recompense the poor; his own hands must return his wealth.
JOB 20:11 His bones were full of his youthful vigor, but that vigor will lie down with him in the dust.
JOB 20:12 “If evil is sweet in his mouth and he hides it under his tongue,
JOB 20:13 if he retains it for himself and does not let it go, and holds it fast in his mouth,
JOB 20:14 his food is turned sour in his stomach; it becomes the venom of serpents within him.
JOB 20:15 The wealth that he consumed he vomits up, God will make him throw it out of his stomach.
JOB 20:16 He sucks the poison of serpents; the fangs of a viper kill him.
JOB 20:17 He will not look on the streams, the rivers, which are the torrents of honey and butter.
JOB 20:18 He gives back the ill-gotten gain without assimilating it; he will not enjoy the wealth from his commerce.
JOB 20:19 For he has oppressed the poor and abandoned them; he has seized a house which he did not build.
JOB 20:20 For he knows no satisfaction in his appetite; he does not let anything he desires escape.
JOB 20:21 “Nothing is left for him to devour; that is why his prosperity does not last.
JOB 20:22 In the fullness of his sufficiency, distress overtakes him. the full force of misery will come upon him.
JOB 20:23 “While he is filling his belly, God sends his burning anger against him, and rains down his blows upon him.
JOB 20:24 If he flees from an iron weapon, then an arrow from a bronze bow pierces him.
JOB 20:25 When he pulls it out and it comes out of his back, the gleaming point out of his liver, terrors come over him.
JOB 20:26 Total darkness waits to receive his treasures; a fire which has not been kindled will consume him and devour what is left in his tent.
JOB 20:27 The heavens reveal his iniquity; the earth rises up against him.
JOB 20:28 A flood will carry off his house, rushing waters on the day of God’s wrath.
JOB 20:29 Such is the lot God allots the wicked, and the heritage of his appointment from God.”
JOB 21:1 Then Job answered:
JOB 21:2 “Listen carefully to my words; let this be the consolation you offer me.
JOB 21:3 Bear with me and I will speak, and after I have spoken you may mock.
JOB 21:4 Is my complaint against a man? If so, why should I not be impatient?
JOB 21:5 Look at me and be appalled; put your hands over your mouths.
JOB 21:6 For, when I think about this, I am terrified and my body feels a shudder.
JOB 21:7 “Why do the wicked go on living, grow old, even increase in power?
JOB 21:8 Their children are firmly established in their presence, their offspring before their eyes.
JOB 21:9 Their houses are safe and without fear; and no rod of punishment from God is upon them.
JOB 21:10 Their bulls breed without fail; their cows calve and do not miscarry.
JOB 21:11 They allow their children to run like a flock; their little ones dance about.
JOB 21:12 They sing to the accompaniment of tambourine and harp, and make merry to the sound of the flute.
JOB 21:13 They live out their years in prosperity and go down to the grave in peace.
JOB 21:14 So they say to God, ‘Turn away from us! We do not want to know your ways.
JOB 21:15 Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? What would we gain if we were to pray to him?’
JOB 21:16 But their prosperity is not their own doing. The counsel of the wicked is far from me!
JOB 21:17 “How often is the lamp of the wicked extinguished? How often does their misfortune come upon them? How often does God apportion pain to them in his anger?
JOB 21:18 How often are they like straw before the wind, and like chaff swept away by a whirlwind?
JOB 21:19 You may say, ‘God stores up a man’s punishment for his children!’ Instead let him repay the man himself so that he may know it!
JOB 21:20 Let his own eyes see his destruction; let him drink of the anger of the Almighty.
JOB 21:21 For what is his interest in his home after his death, when the number of his months has been broken off?
JOB 21:22 Can anyone teach God knowledge, since he judges those that are on high?
JOB 21:23 “One man dies in his full vigor, completely secure and prosperous,
JOB 21:24 his body well nourished, and the marrow of his bones moist.
JOB 21:25 And another man dies in bitterness of soul, never having tasted anything good.
JOB 21:26 Together they lie down in the dust, and worms cover over them both.
JOB 21:27 “Yes, I know what you are thinking, the schemes by which you would wrong me.
JOB 21:28 For you say, ‘Where now is the nobleman’s house, and where are the tents in which the wicked lived?’
JOB 21:29 Have you never questioned those who travel the roads? Do you not recognize their accounts –
JOB 21:30 that the evil man is spared from the day of his misfortune, that he is delivered from the day of God’s wrath?
JOB 21:31 No one denounces his conduct to his face; no one repays him for what he has done.
JOB 21:32 And when he is carried to the tombs, and watch is kept over the funeral mound,
JOB 21:33 The clods of the torrent valley are sweet to him; behind him everybody follows in procession, and before him goes a countless throng.
JOB 21:34 So how can you console me with your futile words? Nothing is left of your answers but deception!”
JOB 22:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered:
JOB 22:2 “Is it to God that a strong man is of benefit? Is it to him that even a wise man is profitable?
JOB 22:3 Is it of any special benefit to the Almighty that you should be righteous, or is it any gain to him that you make your ways blameless?
JOB 22:4 Is it because of your piety that he rebukes you and goes to judgment with you?
JOB 22:5 Is not your wickedness great and is there no end to your iniquity?
JOB 22:6 “For you took pledges from your brothers for no reason, and you stripped the clothing from the naked.
JOB 22:7 You gave the weary no water to drink and from the hungry you withheld food.
JOB 22:8 Although you were a powerful man, owning land, an honored man living on it,
JOB 22:9 you sent widows away empty-handed, and the arms of the orphans you crushed.
JOB 22:10 That is why snares surround you, and why sudden fear terrifies you,
JOB 22:11 why it is so dark you cannot see, and why a flood of water covers you.
JOB 22:12 “Is not God on high in heaven? And see the lofty stars, how high they are!
JOB 22:13 But you have said, ‘What does God know? Does he judge through such deep darkness?
JOB 22:14 Thick clouds are a veil for him, so he does not see us, as he goes back and forth in the vault of heaven.’
JOB 22:15 Will you keep to the old path that evil men have walked –
JOB 22:16 men who were carried off before their time, when the flood was poured out on their foundations?
JOB 22:17 They were saying to God, ‘Turn away from us,’ and ‘What can the Almighty do to us?’
JOB 22:18 But it was he who filled their houses with good things – yet the counsel of the wicked was far from me.
JOB 22:19 The righteous see their destruction and rejoice; the innocent mock them scornfully, saying,
JOB 22:20 ‘Surely our enemies are destroyed, and fire consumes their wealth.’
JOB 22:21 “Reconcile yourself with God, and be at peace with him; in this way your prosperity will be good.
JOB 22:22 Accept instruction from his mouth and store up his words in your heart.
JOB 22:23 If you return to the Almighty, you will be built up; if you remove wicked behavior far from your tent,
JOB 22:24 and throw your gold in the dust – your gold of Ophir among the rocks in the ravines –
JOB 22:25 then the Almighty himself will be your gold, and the choicest silver for you.
JOB 22:26 Surely then you will delight yourself in the Almighty, and will lift up your face toward God.
JOB 22:27 You will pray to him and he will hear you, and you will fulfill your vows to him.
JOB 22:28 Whatever you decide on a matter, it will be established for you, and light will shine on your ways.
JOB 22:29 When people are brought low and you say ‘Lift them up!’ then he will save the downcast;
JOB 22:30 he will deliver even someone who is not innocent, who will escape through the cleanness of your hands.”
JOB 23:1 Then Job answered:
JOB 23:2 “Even today my complaint is still bitter; his hand is heavy despite my groaning.
JOB 23:3 O that I knew where I might find him, that I could come to his place of residence!
JOB 23:4 I would lay out my case before him and fill my mouth with arguments.
JOB 23:5 I would know with what words he would answer me, and understand what he would say to me.
JOB 23:6 Would he contend with me with great power? No, he would only pay attention to me.
JOB 23:7 There an upright person could present his case before him, and I would be delivered forever from my judge.
JOB 23:8 “If I go to the east, he is not there, and to the west, yet I do not perceive him.
JOB 23:9 In the north when he is at work, I do not see him; when he turns to the south, I see no trace of him.
JOB 23:10 But he knows the pathway that I take; if he tested me, I would come forth like gold.
JOB 23:11 My feet have followed his steps closely; I have kept to his way and have not turned aside.
JOB 23:12 I have not departed from the commands of his lips; I have treasured the words of his mouth more than my allotted portion.
JOB 23:13 But he is unchangeable, and who can change him? Whatever he has desired, he does.
JOB 23:14 For he fulfills his decree against me, and many such things are his plans.
JOB 23:15 That is why I am terrified in his presence; when I consider, I am afraid because of him.
JOB 23:16 Indeed, God has made my heart faint; the Almighty has terrified me.
JOB 23:17 Yet I have not been silent because of the darkness, because of the thick darkness that covered my face.
JOB 24:1 “Why are times not appointed by the Almighty? Why do those who know him not see his days?
JOB 24:2 Men move boundary stones; they seize the flock and pasture them.
JOB 24:3 They drive away the orphan’s donkey; they take the widow’s ox as a pledge.
JOB 24:4 They turn the needy from the pathway, and the poor of the land hide themselves together.
JOB 24:5 Like wild donkeys in the desert they go out to their labor, seeking diligently for food; the wasteland provides food for them and for their children.
JOB 24:6 They reap fodder in the field, and glean in the vineyard of the wicked.
JOB 24:7 They spend the night naked because they lack clothing; they have no covering against the cold.
JOB 24:8 They are soaked by mountain rains and huddle in the rocks because they lack shelter.
JOB 24:9 The fatherless child is snatched from the breast, the infant of the poor is taken as a pledge.
JOB 24:10 They go about naked, without clothing, and go hungry while they carry the sheaves.
JOB 24:11 They press out the olive oil between the rows of olive trees; they tread the winepresses while they are thirsty.
JOB 24:12 From the city the dying groan, and the wounded cry out for help, but God charges no one with wrongdoing.
JOB 24:13 There are those who rebel against the light; they do not know its ways and they do not stay on its paths.
JOB 24:14 Before daybreak the murderer rises up; he kills the poor and the needy; in the night he is like a thief.
JOB 24:15 And the eye of the adulterer watches for the twilight, thinking, ‘No eye can see me,’ and covers his face with a mask.
JOB 24:16 In the dark the robber breaks into houses, but by day they shut themselves in; they do not know the light.
JOB 24:17 For all of them, the morning is to them like deep darkness; they are friends with the terrors of darkness.
JOB 24:18 “You say, ‘He is foam on the face of the waters; their portion of the land is cursed so that no one goes to their vineyard.
JOB 24:19 The drought as well as the heat carry away the melted snow; so the grave takes away those who have sinned.
JOB 24:20 The womb forgets him, the worm feasts on him, no longer will he be remembered. Like a tree, wickedness will be broken down.
JOB 24:21 He preys on the barren and childless woman, and does not treat the widow well.
JOB 24:22 But God drags off the mighty by his power; when God rises up against him, he has no faith in his life.
JOB 24:23 God may let them rest in a feeling of security, but he is constantly watching all their ways.
JOB 24:24 They are exalted for a little while, and then they are gone, they are brought low like all others, and gathered in, and like a head of grain they are cut off.’
JOB 24:25 “If this is not so, who can prove me a liar and reduce my words to nothing?”
JOB 25:1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered:
JOB 25:2 “Dominion and awesome might belong to God; he establishes peace in his heights.
JOB 25:3 Can his armies be numbered? On whom does his light not rise?
JOB 25:4 How then can a human being be righteous before God? How can one born of a woman be pure?
JOB 25:5 If even the moon is not bright, and the stars are not pure as far as he is concerned,
JOB 25:6 how much less a mortal man, who is but a maggot – a son of man, who is only a worm!”
JOB 26:1 Then Job replied:
JOB 26:2 “How you have helped the powerless! How you have saved the person who has no strength!
JOB 26:3 How you have advised the one without wisdom, and abundantly revealed your insight!
JOB 26:4 To whom did you utter these words? And whose spirit has come forth from your mouth?
JOB 26:5 “The dead tremble – those beneath the waters and all that live in them.
JOB 26:6 The underworld is naked before God; the place of destruction lies uncovered.
JOB 26:7 He spreads out the northern skies over empty space; he suspends the earth on nothing.
JOB 26:8 He locks the waters in his clouds, and the clouds do not burst with the weight of them.
JOB 26:9 He conceals the face of the full moon, shrouding it with his clouds.
JOB 26:10 He marks out the horizon on the surface of the waters as a boundary between light and darkness.
JOB 26:11 The pillars of the heavens tremble and are amazed at his rebuke.
JOB 26:12 By his power he stills the sea; by his wisdom he cut Rahab the great sea monster to pieces.
JOB 26:13 By his breath the skies became fair; his hand pierced the fleeing serpent.
JOB 26:14 Indeed, these are but the outer fringes of his ways! How faint is the whisper we hear of him! But who can understand the thunder of his power?”
JOB 27:1 And Job took up his discourse again:
JOB 27:2 “As surely as God lives, who has denied me justice, the Almighty, who has made my life bitter –
JOB 27:3 for while my spirit is still in me, and the breath from God is in my nostrils,
JOB 27:4 my lips will not speak wickedness, and my tongue will whisper no deceit.
JOB 27:5 I will never declare that you three are in the right; until I die, I will not set aside my integrity!
JOB 27:6 I will maintain my righteousness and never let it go; my conscience will not reproach me for as long as I live.
JOB 27:7 “May my enemy be like the wicked, my adversary like the unrighteous.
JOB 27:8 For what hope does the godless have when he is cut off, when God takes away his life?
JOB 27:9 Does God listen to his cry when distress overtakes him?
JOB 27:10 Will he find delight in the Almighty? Will he call out to God at all times?
JOB 27:11 I will teach you about the power of God; What is on the Almighty’s mind I will not conceal.
JOB 27:12 If you yourselves have all seen this, Why in the world do you continue this meaningless talk?
JOB 27:13 This is the portion of the wicked man allotted by God, the inheritance that evildoers receive from the Almighty.
JOB 27:14 If his children increase – it is for the sword! His offspring never have enough to eat.
JOB 27:15 Those who survive him are buried by the plague, and their widows do not mourn for them.
JOB 27:16 If he piles up silver like dust and stores up clothing like mounds of clay,
JOB 27:17 what he stores up a righteous man will wear, and an innocent man will inherit his silver.
JOB 27:18 The house he builds is as fragile as a moth’s cocoon, like a hut that a watchman has made.
JOB 27:19 He goes to bed wealthy, but will do so no more. When he opens his eyes, it is all gone.
JOB 27:20 Terrors overwhelm him like a flood; at night a whirlwind carries him off.
JOB 27:21 The east wind carries him away, and he is gone; it sweeps him out of his place.
JOB 27:22 It hurls itself against him without pity as he flees headlong from its power.
JOB 27:23 It claps its hands at him in derision and hisses him away from his place.
JOB 28:1 “Surely there is a mine for silver, and a place where gold is refined.
JOB 28:2 Iron is taken from the ground, and rock is poured out as copper.
JOB 28:3 Man puts an end to the darkness; he searches the farthest recesses for the ore in the deepest darkness.
JOB 28:4 Far from where people live he sinks a shaft, in places travelers have long forgotten, far from other people he dangles and sways.
JOB 28:5 The earth, from which food comes, is overturned below as though by fire;
JOB 28:6 a place whose stones are sapphires and which contains dust of gold;
JOB 28:7 a hidden path no bird of prey knows – no falcon’s eye has spotted it.
JOB 28:8 Proud beasts have not set foot on it, and no lion has passed along it.
JOB 28:9 On the flinty rock man has set to work with his hand; he has overturned mountains at their bases.
JOB 28:10 He has cut out channels through the rocks; his eyes have spotted every precious thing.
JOB 28:11 He has searched the sources of the rivers and what was hidden he has brought into the light.
JOB 28:12 “But wisdom – where can it be found? Where is the place of understanding?
JOB 28:13 Mankind does not know its place; it cannot be found in the land of the living.
JOB 28:14 The deep says, ‘It is not with me.’ And the sea says, ‘It is not with me.’
JOB 28:15 Fine gold cannot be given in exchange for it, nor can its price be weighed out in silver.
JOB 28:16 It cannot be measured out for purchase with the gold of Ophir, with precious onyx or sapphires.
JOB 28:17 Neither gold nor crystal can be compared with it, nor can a vase of gold match its worth.
JOB 28:18 Of coral and jasper no mention will be made; the price of wisdom is more than pearls.
JOB 28:19 The topaz of Cush cannot be compared with it; it cannot be purchased with pure gold.
JOB 28:20 “But wisdom – where does it come from? Where is the place of understanding?
JOB 28:21 For it has been hidden from the eyes of every living creature, and from the birds of the sky it has been concealed.
JOB 28:22 Destruction and Death say, ‘With our ears we have heard a rumor about where it can be found.’
JOB 28:23 God understands the way to it, and he alone knows its place.
JOB 28:24 For he looks to the ends of the earth and observes everything under the heavens.
JOB 28:25 When he made the force of the wind and measured the waters with a gauge.
JOB 28:26 When he imposed a limit for the rain, and a path for the thunderstorm,
JOB 28:27 then he looked at wisdom and assessed its value; he established it and examined it closely.
JOB 28:28 And he said to mankind, ‘The fear of the Lord – that is wisdom, and to turn away from evil is understanding.’”
JOB 29:1 Then Job continued his speech:
JOB 29:2 “O that I could be as I was in the months now gone, in the days when God watched over me,
JOB 29:3 when he caused his lamp to shine upon my head, and by his light I walked through darkness;
JOB 29:4 just as I was in my most productive time, when God’s intimate friendship was experienced in my tent,
JOB 29:5 when the Almighty was still with me and my children were around me;
JOB 29:6 when my steps were bathed with butter and the rock poured out for me streams of olive oil!
JOB 29:7 When I went out to the city gate and secured my seat in the public square,
JOB 29:8 the young men would see me and step aside, and the old men would get up and remain standing;
JOB 29:9 the chief men refrained from talking and covered their mouths with their hands;
JOB 29:10 the voices of the nobles fell silent, and their tongues stuck to the roof of their mouths.
JOB 29:11 “As soon as the ear heard these things, it blessed me, and when the eye saw them, it bore witness to me,
JOB 29:12 for I rescued the poor who cried out for help, and the orphan who had no one to assist him;
JOB 29:13 the blessing of the dying man descended on me, and I made the widow’s heart rejoice;
JOB 29:14 I put on righteousness and it clothed me, my just dealing was like a robe and a turban;
JOB 29:15 I was eyes for the blind and feet for the lame;
JOB 29:16 I was a father to the needy, and I investigated the case of the person I did not know;
JOB 29:17 I broke the fangs of the wicked, and made him drop his prey from his teeth.
JOB 29:18 “Then I thought, ‘I will die in my own home, my days as numerous as the grains of sand.
JOB 29:19 My roots reach the water, and the dew lies on my branches all night long.
JOB 29:20 My glory will always be fresh in me, and my bow ever new in my hand.’
JOB 29:21 “People listened to me and waited silently; they kept silent for my advice.
JOB 29:22 After I had spoken, they did not respond; my words fell on them drop by drop.
JOB 29:23 They waited for me as people wait for the rain, and they opened their mouths as for the spring rains.
JOB 29:24 If I smiled at them, they hardly believed it; and they did not cause the light of my face to darken.
JOB 29:25 I chose the way for them and sat as their chief; I lived like a king among his troops; I was like one who comforts mourners.
JOB 30:1 “But now they mock me, those who are younger than I, whose fathers I disdained too much to put with my sheep dogs.
JOB 30:2 Moreover, the strength of their hands – what use was it to me? Men whose strength had perished;
JOB 30:3 gaunt with want and hunger, they would gnaw the parched land, in former time desolate and waste.
JOB 30:4 By the brush they would gather herbs from the salt marshes, and the root of the broom tree was their food.
JOB 30:5 They were banished from the community – people shouted at them like they would shout at thieves –
JOB 30:6 so that they had to live in the dry stream beds, in the holes of the ground, and among the rocks.
JOB 30:7 They brayed like animals among the bushes and were huddled together under the nettles.
JOB 30:8 Sons of senseless and nameless people, they were driven out of the land with whips.
JOB 30:9 “And now I have become their taunt song; I have become a byword among them.
JOB 30:10 They detest me and maintain their distance; they do not hesitate to spit in my face.
JOB 30:11 Because God has untied my tent cord and afflicted me, people throw off all restraint in my presence.
JOB 30:12 On my right the young rabble rise up; they drive me from place to place, and build up siege ramps against me.
JOB 30:13 They destroy my path; they succeed in destroying me without anyone assisting them.
JOB 30:14 They come in as through a wide breach; amid the crash they come rolling in.
JOB 30:15 Terrors are turned loose on me; they drive away my honor like the wind, and like a cloud my deliverance has passed away.
JOB 30:16 “And now my soul pours itself out within me; days of suffering take hold of me.
JOB 30:17 Night pierces my bones; my gnawing pains never cease.
JOB 30:18 With great power God grasps my clothing; he binds me like the collar of my tunic.
JOB 30:19 He has flung me into the mud, and I have come to resemble dust and ashes.
JOB 30:20 I cry out to you, but you do not answer me; I stand up, and you only look at me.
JOB 30:21 You have become cruel to me; with the strength of your hand you attack me.
JOB 30:22 You pick me up on the wind and make me ride on it; you toss me about in the storm.
JOB 30:23 I know that you are bringing me to death, to the meeting place for all the living.
JOB 30:24 “Surely one does not stretch out his hand against a broken man when he cries for help in his distress.
JOB 30:25 Have I not wept for the unfortunate? Was not my soul grieved for the poor?
JOB 30:26 But when I hoped for good, trouble came; when I expected light, then darkness came.
JOB 30:27 My heart is in turmoil unceasingly; the days of my affliction confront me.
JOB 30:28 I go about blackened, but not by the sun; in the assembly I stand up and cry for help.
JOB 30:29 I have become a brother to jackals and a companion of ostriches.
JOB 30:30 My skin has turned dark on me; my body is hot with fever.
JOB 30:31 My harp is used for mourning and my flute for the sound of weeping.
JOB 31:1 “I made a covenant with my eyes; how then could I entertain thoughts against a virgin?
JOB 31:2 What then would be one’s lot from God above, one’s heritage from the Almighty on high?
JOB 31:3 Is it not misfortune for the unjust, and disaster for those who work iniquity?
JOB 31:4 Does he not see my ways and count all my steps?
JOB 31:5 If I have walked in falsehood, and if my foot has hastened to deceit –
JOB 31:6 let him weigh me with honest scales; then God will discover my integrity.
JOB 31:7 If my footsteps have strayed from the way, if my heart has gone after my eyes, or if anything has defiled my hands,
JOB 31:8 then let me sow and let another eat, and let my crops be uprooted.
JOB 31:9 If my heart has been enticed by a woman, and I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door,
JOB 31:10 then let my wife turn the millstone for another man, and may other men have sexual relations with her.
JOB 31:11 For I would have committed a shameful act, an iniquity to be judged.
JOB 31:12 For it is a fire that devours even to Destruction, and it would uproot all my harvest.
JOB 31:13 “If I have disregarded the right of my male servants or my female servants when they disputed with me,
JOB 31:14 then what will I do when God confronts me in judgment; when he intervenes, how will I respond to him?
JOB 31:15 Did not the one who made me in the womb make them? Did not the same one form us in the womb?
JOB 31:16 If I have refused to give the poor what they desired, or caused the eyes of the widow to fail,
JOB 31:17 If I ate my morsel of bread myself, and did not share any of it with orphans –
JOB 31:18 but from my youth I raised the orphan like a father, and from my mother’s womb I guided the widow!
JOB 31:19 If I have seen anyone about to perish for lack of clothing, or a poor man without a coat,
JOB 31:20 whose heart did not bless me as he warmed himself with the fleece of my sheep,
JOB 31:21 if I have raised my hand to vote against the orphan, when I saw my support in the court,
JOB 31:22 then let my arm fall from the shoulder, let my arm be broken off at the socket.
JOB 31:23 For the calamity from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his majesty I was powerless.
JOB 31:24 “If I have put my confidence in gold or said to pure gold, ‘You are my security!’
JOB 31:25 if I have rejoiced because of the extent of my wealth, or because of the great wealth my hand had gained,
JOB 31:26 if I looked at the sun when it was shining, and the moon advancing as a precious thing,
JOB 31:27 so that my heart was secretly enticed, and my hand threw them a kiss from my mouth,
JOB 31:28 then this also would be iniquity to be judged, for I would have been false to God above.
JOB 31:29 If I have rejoiced over the misfortune of my enemy or exulted because calamity found him –
JOB 31:30 I have not even permitted my mouth to sin by asking for his life through a curse –
JOB 31:31 if the members of my household have never said, ‘If only there were someone who has not been satisfied from Job’s meat!’ –
JOB 31:32 But no stranger had to spend the night outside, for I opened my doors to the traveler –
JOB 31:33 if I have covered my transgressions as men do, by hiding iniquity in my heart,
JOB 31:34 because I was terrified of the great multitude, and the contempt of families terrified me, so that I remained silent and would not go outdoors –
JOB 31:35 “If only I had someone to hear me! Here is my signature – let the Almighty answer me! If only I had an indictment that my accuser had written.
JOB 31:36 Surely I would wear it proudly on my shoulder, I would bind it on me like a crown;
JOB 31:37 I would give him an accounting of my steps; like a prince I would approach him.
JOB 31:38 “If my land cried out against me and all its furrows wept together,
JOB 31:39 if I have eaten its produce without paying, or caused the death of its owners,
JOB 31:40 then let thorns sprout up in place of wheat, and in place of barley, weeds!” The words of Job are ended.
JOB 32:1 So these three men refused to answer Job further, because he was righteous in his own eyes.
JOB 32:2 Then Elihu son of Barakel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, became very angry. He was angry with Job for justifying himself rather than God.
JOB 32:3 With Job’s three friends he was also angry, because they could not find an answer, and so declared Job guilty.
JOB 32:4 Now Elihu had waited before speaking to Job, because the others were older than he was.
JOB 32:5 But when Elihu saw that the three men had no further reply, he became very angry.
JOB 32:6 So Elihu son of Barakel the Buzite spoke up: “I am young, but you are elderly; that is why I was fearful, and afraid to explain to you what I know.
JOB 32:7 I said to myself, ‘Age should speak, and length of years should make wisdom known.’
JOB 32:8 But it is a spirit in people, the breath of the Almighty, that makes them understand.
JOB 32:9 It is not the aged who are wise, nor old men who understand what is right.
JOB 32:10 Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me. I, even I, will explain what I know.’
JOB 32:11 Look, I waited for you to speak; I listened closely to your wise thoughts, while you were searching for words.
JOB 32:12 Now I was paying you close attention, yet there was no one proving Job wrong, not one of you was answering his statements!
JOB 32:13 So do not say, ‘We have found wisdom! God will refute him, not man!’
JOB 32:14 Job has not directed his words to me, and so I will not reply to him with your arguments.
JOB 32:15 “They are dismayed and cannot answer any more; they have nothing left to say.
JOB 32:16 And I have waited. But because they do not speak, because they stand there and answer no more,
JOB 32:17 I too will answer my part, I too will explain what I know.
JOB 32:18 For I am full of words, and the spirit within me constrains me.
JOB 32:19 Inside I am like wine which has no outlet, like new wineskins ready to burst!
JOB 32:20 I will speak, so that I may find relief; I will open my lips, so that I may answer.
JOB 32:21 I will not show partiality to anyone, nor will I confer a title on any man.
JOB 32:22 for I do not know how to give honorary titles, if I did, my Creator would quickly do away with me.
JOB 33:1 “But now, O Job, listen to my words, and hear everything I have to say!
JOB 33:2 See now, I have opened my mouth; my tongue in my mouth has spoken.
JOB 33:3 My words come from the uprightness of my heart, and my lips will utter knowledge sincerely.
JOB 33:4 The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
JOB 33:5 Reply to me, if you can; set your arguments in order before me and take your stand!
JOB 33:6 Look, I am just like you in relation to God; I too have been molded from clay.
JOB 33:7 Therefore no fear of me should terrify you, nor should my pressure be heavy on you.
JOB 33:8 “Indeed, you have said in my hearing (I heard the sound of the words!):
JOB 33:9 ‘I am pure, without transgression; I am clean and have no iniquity.
JOB 33:10 Yet God finds occasions with me; he regards me as his enemy!
JOB 33:11 He puts my feet in shackles; he watches closely all my paths.’
JOB 33:12 Now in this, you are not right – I answer you, for God is greater than a human being.
JOB 33:13 Why do you contend against him, that he does not answer all a person’s words?
JOB 33:14 “For God speaks, the first time in one way, the second time in another, though a person does not perceive it.
JOB 33:15 In a dream, a night vision, when deep sleep falls on people as they sleep in their beds.
JOB 33:16 Then he gives a revelation to people, and terrifies them with warnings,
JOB 33:17 to turn a person from his sin, and to cover a person’s pride.
JOB 33:18 He spares a person’s life from corruption, his very life from crossing over the river.
JOB 33:19 Or a person is chastened by pain on his bed, and with the continual strife of his bones,
JOB 33:20 so that his life loathes food, and his soul rejects appetizing fare.
JOB 33:21 His flesh wastes away from sight, and his bones, which were not seen, are easily visible.
JOB 33:22 He draws near to the place of corruption, and his life to the messengers of death.
JOB 33:23 If there is an angel beside him, one mediator out of a thousand, to tell a person what constitutes his uprightness;
JOB 33:24 and if God is gracious to him and says, ‘Spare him from going down to the place of corruption, I have found a ransom for him,’
JOB 33:25 then his flesh is restored like a youth’s; he returns to the days of his youthful vigor.
JOB 33:26 He entreats God, and God delights in him, he sees God’s face with rejoicing, and God restores to him his righteousness.
JOB 33:27 That person sings to others, saying: ‘I have sinned and falsified what is right, but I was not punished according to what I deserved.
JOB 33:28 He redeemed my life from going down to the place of corruption, and my life sees the light!’
JOB 33:29 “Indeed, God does all these things, twice, three times, in his dealings with a person,
JOB 33:30 to turn back his life from the place of corruption, that he may be enlightened with the light of life.
JOB 33:31 Pay attention, Job – listen to me; be silent, and I will speak.
JOB 33:32 If you have any words, reply to me; speak, for I want to justify you.
JOB 33:33 If not, you listen to me; be silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”
JOB 34:1 Elihu answered:
JOB 34:2 “Listen to my words, you wise men; hear me, you learned men.
JOB 34:3 For the ear assesses words as the mouth tastes food.
JOB 34:4 Let us evaluate for ourselves what is right; let us come to know among ourselves what is good.
JOB 34:5 For Job says, ‘I am innocent, but God turns away my right.
JOB 34:6 Concerning my right, should I lie? My wound is incurable, although I am without transgression.’
JOB 34:7 What man is like Job, who drinks derision like water!
JOB 34:8 He goes about in company with evildoers, he goes along with wicked men.
JOB 34:9 For he says, ‘It does not profit a man when he makes his delight with God.’
JOB 34:10 “Therefore, listen to me, you men of understanding. Far be it from God to do wickedness, from the Almighty to do evil.
JOB 34:11 For he repays a person for his work, and according to the conduct of a person, he causes the consequences to find him.
JOB 34:12 Indeed, in truth, God does not act wickedly, and the Almighty does not pervert justice.
JOB 34:13 Who entrusted to him the earth? And who put him over the whole world?
JOB 34:14 If God were to set his heart on it, and gather in his spirit and his breath,
JOB 34:15 all flesh would perish together and human beings would return to dust.
JOB 34:16 “If you have understanding, listen to this, hear what I have to say.
JOB 34:17 Do you really think that one who hates justice can govern? And will you declare guilty the supremely righteous One,
JOB 34:18 who says to a king, ‘Worthless man’ and to nobles, ‘Wicked men,’
JOB 34:19 who shows no partiality to princes, and does not take note of the rich more than the poor, because all of them are the work of his hands?
JOB 34:20 In a moment they die, in the middle of the night, people are shaken and they pass away. The mighty are removed effortlessly.
JOB 34:21 For his eyes are on the ways of an individual, he observes all a person’s steps.
JOB 34:22 There is no darkness, and no deep darkness, where evildoers can hide themselves.
JOB 34:23 For he does not still consider a person, that he should come before God in judgment.
JOB 34:24 He shatters the great without inquiry, and sets up others in their place.
JOB 34:25 Therefore, he knows their deeds, he overthrows them in the night and they are crushed.
JOB 34:26 He strikes them for their wickedness, in a place where people can see,
JOB 34:27 because they have turned away from following him, and have not understood any of his ways,
JOB 34:28 so that they caused the cry of the poor to come before him, so that he hears the cry of the needy.
JOB 34:29 But if God is quiet, who can condemn him? If he hides his face, then who can see him? Yet he is over the individual and the nation alike,
JOB 34:30 so that the godless man should not rule, and not lay snares for the people.
JOB 34:31 “Has anyone said to God, ‘I have endured chastisement, but I will not act wrongly any more.
JOB 34:32 Teach me what I cannot see. If I have done evil, I will do so no more.’
JOB 34:33 Is it your opinion that God should recompense it, because you reject this? But you must choose, and not I, so tell us what you know.
JOB 34:34 Men of understanding say to me – any wise man listening to me says –
JOB 34:35 that Job speaks without knowledge and his words are without understanding.
JOB 34:36 But Job will be tested to the end, because his answers are like those of wicked men.
JOB 34:37 For he adds transgression to his sin; in our midst he claps his hands, and multiplies his words against God.”
JOB 35:1 Then Elihu answered:
JOB 35:2 “Do you think this to be just: when you say, ‘My right before God.’
JOB 35:3 But you say, ‘What will it profit you,’ and, ‘What do I gain by not sinning?’
JOB 35:4 I will reply to you, and to your friends with you.
JOB 35:5 Gaze at the heavens and see; consider the clouds, which are higher than you!
JOB 35:6 If you sin, how does it affect God? If your transgressions are many, what does it do to him?
JOB 35:7 If you are righteous, what do you give to God, or what does he receive from your hand?
JOB 35:8 Your wickedness affects only a person like yourself, and your righteousness only other people.
JOB 35:9 “People cry out because of the excess of oppression; they cry out for help because of the power of the mighty.
JOB 35:10 But no one says, ‘Where is God, my Creator, who gives songs in the night,
JOB 35:11 who teaches us more than the wild animals of the earth, and makes us wiser than the birds of the sky?’
JOB 35:12 Then they cry out – but he does not answer – because of the arrogance of the wicked.
JOB 35:13 Surely it is an empty cry – God does not hear it; the Almighty does not take notice of it.
JOB 35:14 How much less, then, when you say that you do not perceive him, that the case is before him and you are waiting for him!
JOB 35:15 And further, when you say that his anger does not punish, and that he does not know transgression!
JOB 35:16 So Job opens his mouth to no purpose; without knowledge he multiplies words.”
JOB 36:1 Elihu said further:
JOB 36:2 “Be patient with me a little longer and I will instruct you, for I still have words to speak on God’s behalf.
JOB 36:3 With my knowledge I will speak comprehensively, and to my Creator I will ascribe righteousness.
JOB 36:4 For in truth, my words are not false; it is one complete in knowledge who is with you.
JOB 36:5 Indeed, God is mighty; and he does not despise people, he is mighty, and firm in his intent.
JOB 36:6 He does not allow the wicked to live, but he gives justice to the poor.
JOB 36:7 He does not take his eyes off the righteous; but with kings on the throne he seats the righteous and exalts them forever.
JOB 36:8 But if they are bound in chains, and held captive by the cords of affliction,
JOB 36:9 then he reveals to them what they have done, and their transgressions, that they were behaving proudly.
JOB 36:10 And he reveals this for correction, and says that they must turn from evil.
JOB 36:11 If they obey and serve him, they live out their days in prosperity and their years in pleasantness.
JOB 36:12 But if they refuse to listen, they pass over the river of death, and expire without knowledge.
JOB 36:13 The godless at heart nourish anger, they do not cry out even when he binds them.
JOB 36:14 They die in their youth, and their life ends among the male cultic prostitutes.
JOB 36:15 He delivers the afflicted by their afflictions, he reveals himself to them by their suffering.
JOB 36:16 And surely, he drew you from the mouth of distress, to a wide place, unrestricted, and to the comfort of your table filled with rich food.
JOB 36:17 But now you are preoccupied with the judgment due the wicked, judgment and justice take hold of you.
JOB 36:18 Be careful that no one entices you with riches; do not let a large bribe turn you aside.
JOB 36:19 Would your wealth sustain you, so that you would not be in distress, even all your mighty efforts?
JOB 36:20 Do not long for the cover of night to drag people away from their homes.
JOB 36:21 Take heed, do not turn to evil, for because of this you have been tested by affliction.
JOB 36:22 Indeed, God is exalted in his power; who is a teacher like him?
JOB 36:23 Who has prescribed his ways for him? Or said to him, ‘You have done what is wicked’?
JOB 36:24 Remember to extol his work, which people have praised in song.
JOB 36:25 All humanity has seen it; people gaze on it from afar.
JOB 36:26 “Yes, God is great – beyond our knowledge! The number of his years is unsearchable.
JOB 36:27 He draws up drops of water; they distill the rain into its mist,
JOB 36:28 which the clouds pour down and shower on humankind abundantly.
JOB 36:29 Who can understand the spreading of the clouds, the thunderings of his pavilion?
JOB 36:30 See how he scattered his lightning about him; he has covered the depths of the sea.
JOB 36:31 It is by these that he judges the nations and supplies food in abundance.
JOB 36:32 With his hands he covers the lightning, and directs it against its target.
JOB 36:33 His thunder announces the coming storm, the cattle also, concerning the storm’s approach.
JOB 37:1 At this also my heart pounds and leaps from its place.
JOB 37:2 Listen carefully to the thunder of his voice, to the rumbling that proceeds from his mouth.
JOB 37:3 Under the whole heaven he lets it go, even his lightning to the far corners of the earth.
JOB 37:4 After that a voice roars; he thunders with an exalted voice, and he does not hold back his lightning bolts when his voice is heard.
JOB 37:5 God thunders with his voice in marvelous ways; he does great things beyond our understanding.
JOB 37:6 For to the snow he says, ‘Fall to earth,’ and to the torrential rains, ‘Pour down.’
JOB 37:7 He causes everyone to stop working, so that all people may know his work.
JOB 37:8 The wild animals go to their lairs, and in their dens they remain.
JOB 37:9 A tempest blows out from its chamber, icy cold from the driving winds.
JOB 37:10 The breath of God produces ice, and the breadth of the waters freeze solid.
JOB 37:11 He loads the clouds with moisture; he scatters his lightning through the clouds.
JOB 37:12 The clouds go round in circles, wheeling about according to his plans, to carry out all that he commands them over the face of the whole inhabited world.
JOB 37:13 Whether it is for punishment for his land, or whether it is for mercy, he causes it to find its mark.
JOB 37:14 “Pay attention to this, Job! Stand still and consider the wonders God works.
JOB 37:15 Do you know how God commands them, how he makes lightning flash in his storm cloud?
JOB 37:16 Do you know about the balancing of the clouds, that wondrous activity of him who is perfect in knowledge?
JOB 37:17 You, whose garments are hot when the earth is still because of the south wind,
JOB 37:18 will you, with him, spread out the clouds, solid as a mirror of molten metal?
JOB 37:19 Tell us what we should say to him. We cannot prepare a case because of the darkness.
JOB 37:20 Should he be informed that I want to speak? If a man speaks, surely he would be swallowed up!
JOB 37:21 But now, the sun cannot be looked at – it is bright in the skies – after a wind passed and swept the clouds away.
JOB 37:22 From the north he comes in golden splendor; around God is awesome majesty.
JOB 37:23 As for the Almighty, we cannot attain to him! He is great in power, but justice and abundant righteousness he does not oppress.
JOB 37:24 Therefore people fear him, for he does not regard all the wise in heart.”
JOB 38:1 Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind:
JOB 38:2 “Who is this who darkens counsel with words without knowledge?
JOB 38:3 Get ready for a difficult task like a man; I will question you and you will inform me!
JOB 38:4 “Where were you when I laid the foundation of the earth? Tell me, if you possess understanding!
JOB 38:5 Who set its measurements – if you know – or who stretched a measuring line across it?
JOB 38:6 On what were its bases set, or who laid its cornerstone –
JOB 38:7 when the morning stars sang in chorus, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
JOB 38:8 “Who shut up the sea with doors when it burst forth, coming out of the womb,
JOB 38:9 when I made the storm clouds its garment, and thick darkness its swaddling band,
JOB 38:10 when I prescribed its limits, and set in place its bolts and doors,
JOB 38:11 when I said, ‘To here you may come and no farther, here your proud waves will be confined’?
JOB 38:12 Have you ever in your life commanded the morning, or made the dawn know its place,
JOB 38:13 that it might seize the corners of the earth, and shake the wicked out of it?
JOB 38:14 The earth takes shape like clay under a seal; its features are dyed like a garment.
JOB 38:15 Then from the wicked the light is withheld, and the arm raised in violence is broken.
JOB 38:16 Have you gone to the springs that fill the sea, or walked about in the recesses of the deep?
JOB 38:17 Have the gates of death been revealed to you? Have you seen the gates of deepest darkness?
JOB 38:18 Have you considered the vast expanses of the earth? Tell me, if you know it all!
JOB 38:19 “In what direction does light reside, and darkness, where is its place,
JOB 38:20 that you may take them to their borders and perceive the pathways to their homes?
JOB 38:21 You know, for you were born before them; and the number of your days is great!
JOB 38:22 Have you entered the storehouse of the snow, or seen the armory of the hail,
JOB 38:23 which I reserve for the time of trouble, for the day of war and battle?
JOB 38:24 In what direction is lightning dispersed, or the east winds scattered over the earth?
JOB 38:25 Who carves out a channel for the heavy rains, and a path for the rumble of thunder,
JOB 38:26 to cause it to rain on an uninhabited land, a desert where there are no human beings,
JOB 38:27 to satisfy a devastated and desolate land, and to cause it to sprout with vegetation?
JOB 38:28 Does the rain have a father, or who has fathered the drops of the dew?
JOB 38:29 From whose womb does the ice emerge, and the frost from the sky, who gives birth to it,
JOB 38:30 when the waters become hard like stone, when the surface of the deep is frozen solid?
JOB 38:31 Can you tie the bands of the Pleiades, or release the cords of Orion?
JOB 38:32 Can you lead out the constellations in their seasons, or guide the Bear with its cubs?
JOB 38:33 Do you know the laws of the heavens, or can you set up their rule over the earth?
JOB 38:34 Can you raise your voice to the clouds so that a flood of water covers you?
JOB 38:35 Can you send out lightning bolts, and they go? Will they say to you, ‘Here we are’?
JOB 38:36 Who has put wisdom in the heart, or has imparted understanding to the mind?
JOB 38:37 Who by wisdom can count the clouds, and who can tip over the water jars of heaven,
JOB 38:38 when the dust hardens into a mass, and the clumps of earth stick together?
JOB 38:39 “Do you hunt prey for the lioness, and satisfy the appetite of the lions,
JOB 38:40 when they crouch in their dens, when they wait in ambush in the thicket?
JOB 38:41 Who prepares prey for the raven, when its young cry out to God and wander about for lack of food?
JOB 39:1 “Are you acquainted with the way the mountain goats give birth? Do you watch as the wild deer give birth to their young?
JOB 39:2 Do you count the months they must fulfill, and do you know the time they give birth?
JOB 39:3 They crouch, they bear their young, they bring forth the offspring they have carried.
JOB 39:4 Their young grow strong, and grow up in the open; they go off, and do not return to them.
JOB 39:5 Who let the wild donkey go free? Who released the bonds of the donkey,
JOB 39:6 to whom I appointed the steppe for its home, the salt wastes as its dwelling place?
JOB 39:7 It scorns the tumult in the town; it does not hear the shouts of a driver.
JOB 39:8 It ranges the hills as its pasture, and searches after every green plant.
JOB 39:9 Is the wild ox willing to be your servant? Will it spend the night at your feeding trough?
JOB 39:10 Can you bind the wild ox to a furrow with its rope, will it till the valleys, following after you?
JOB 39:11 Will you rely on it because its strength is great? Will you commit your labor to it?
JOB 39:12 Can you count on it to bring in your grain, and gather the grain to your threshing floor?
JOB 39:13 “The wings of the ostrich flap with joy, but are they the pinions and plumage of a stork?
JOB 39:14 For she leaves her eggs on the ground, and lets them be warmed on the soil.
JOB 39:15 She forgets that a foot might crush them, or that a wild animal might trample them.
JOB 39:16 She is harsh with her young, as if they were not hers; she is unconcerned about the uselessness of her labor.
JOB 39:17 For God deprived her of wisdom, and did not impart understanding to her.
JOB 39:18 But as soon as she springs up, she laughs at the horse and its rider.
JOB 39:19 “Do you give the horse its strength? Do you clothe its neck with a mane?
JOB 39:20 Do you make it leap like a locust? Its proud neighing is terrifying!
JOB 39:21 It paws the ground in the valley, exulting mightily, it goes out to meet the weapons.
JOB 39:22 It laughs at fear and is not dismayed; it does not shy away from the sword.
JOB 39:23 On it the quiver rattles; the lance and javelin flash.
JOB 39:24 In excitement and impatience it consumes the ground; it cannot stand still when the trumpet is blown.
JOB 39:25 At the sound of the trumpet, it says, ‘Aha!’ And from a distance it catches the scent of battle, the thunderous shouting of commanders, and the battle cries.
JOB 39:26 “Is it by your understanding that the hawk soars, and spreads its wings toward the south?
JOB 39:27 Is it at your command that the eagle soars, and builds its nest on high?
JOB 39:28 It lives on a rock and spends the night there, on a rocky crag and a fortress.
JOB 39:29 From there it spots its prey, its eyes gaze intently from a distance.
JOB 39:30 And its young ones devour the blood, and where the dead carcasses are, there it is.”
JOB 40:1 Then the Lord answered Job:
JOB 40:2 “Will the one who contends with the Almighty correct him? Let the person who accuses God give him an answer!”
JOB 40:3 Then Job answered the Lord:
JOB 40:4 “Indeed, I am completely unworthy – how could I reply to you? I put my hand over my mouth to silence myself.
JOB 40:5 I have spoken once, but I cannot answer; twice, but I will say no more.”
JOB 40:6 Then the Lord answered Job from the whirlwind:
JOB 40:7 “Get ready for a difficult task like a man. I will question you and you will inform me!
JOB 40:8 Would you indeed annul my justice? Would you declare me guilty so that you might be right?
JOB 40:9 Do you have an arm as powerful as God’s, and can you thunder with a voice like his?
JOB 40:10 Adorn yourself, then, with majesty and excellency, and clothe yourself with glory and honor!
JOB 40:11 Scatter abroad the abundance of your anger. Look at every proud man and bring him low;
JOB 40:12 Look at every proud man and abase him; crush the wicked on the spot!
JOB 40:13 Hide them in the dust together, imprison them in the grave.
JOB 40:14 Then I myself will acknowledge to you that your own right hand can save you.
JOB 40:15 “Look now at Behemoth, which I made as I made you; it eats grass like the ox.
JOB 40:16 Look at its strength in its loins, and its power in the muscles of its belly.
JOB 40:17 It makes its tail stiff like a cedar, the sinews of its thighs are tightly wound.
JOB 40:18 Its bones are tubes of bronze, its limbs like bars of iron.
JOB 40:19 It ranks first among the works of God, the One who made it has furnished it with a sword.
JOB 40:20 For the hills bring it food, where all the wild animals play.
JOB 40:21 Under the lotus trees it lies, in the secrecy of the reeds and the marsh.
JOB 40:22 The lotus trees conceal it in their shadow; the poplars by the stream conceal it.
JOB 40:23 If the river rages, it is not disturbed, it is secure, though the Jordan should surge up to its mouth.
JOB 40:24 Can anyone catch it by its eyes, or pierce its nose with a snare?
JOB 41:1 “Can you pull in Leviathan with a hook, and tie down its tongue with a rope?
JOB 41:2 Can you put a cord through its nose, or pierce its jaw with a hook?
JOB 41:3 Will it make numerous supplications to you, will it speak to you with tender words?
JOB 41:4 Will it make a pact with you, so you could take it as your slave for life?
JOB 41:5 Can you play with it, like a bird, or tie it on a leash for your girls?
JOB 41:6 Will partners bargain for it? Will they divide it up among the merchants?
JOB 41:7 Can you fill its hide with harpoons or its head with fishing spears?
JOB 41:8 If you lay your hand on it, you will remember the fight, and you will never do it again!
JOB 41:9 See, his expectation is wrong, he is laid low even at the sight of it.
JOB 41:10 Is it not fierce when it is awakened? Who is he, then, who can stand before it?
JOB 41:11 (Who has confronted me that I should repay? Everything under heaven belongs to me!)
JOB 41:12 I will not keep silent about its limbs, and the extent of its might, and the grace of its arrangement.
JOB 41:13 Who can uncover its outer covering? Who can penetrate to the inside of its armor?
JOB 41:14 Who can open the doors of its mouth? Its teeth all around are fearsome.
JOB 41:15 Its back has rows of shields, shut up closely together as with a seal;
JOB 41:16 each one is so close to the next that no air can come between them.
JOB 41:17 They lock tightly together, one to the next; they cling together and cannot be separated.
JOB 41:18 Its snorting throws out flashes of light; its eyes are like the red glow of dawn.
JOB 41:19 Out of its mouth go flames, sparks of fire shoot forth!
JOB 41:20 Smoke streams from its nostrils as from a boiling pot over burning rushes.
JOB 41:21 Its breath sets coals ablaze and a flame shoots from its mouth.
JOB 41:22 Strength lodges in its neck, and despair runs before it.
JOB 41:23 The folds of its flesh are tightly joined; they are firm on it, immovable.
JOB 41:24 Its heart is hard as rock, hard as a lower millstone.
JOB 41:25 When it rises up, the mighty are terrified, at its thrashing about they withdraw.
JOB 41:26 Whoever strikes it with a sword will have no effect, nor with the spear, arrow, or dart.
JOB 41:27 It regards iron as straw and bronze as rotten wood.
JOB 41:28 Arrows do not make it flee; slingstones become like chaff to it.
JOB 41:29 A club is counted as a piece of straw; it laughs at the rattling of the lance.
JOB 41:30 Its underparts are the sharp points of potsherds, it leaves its mark in the mud like a threshing sledge.
JOB 41:31 It makes the deep boil like a cauldron and stirs up the sea like a pot of ointment,
JOB 41:32 It leaves a glistening wake behind it; one would think the deep had a head of white hair.
JOB 41:33 The likes of it is not on earth, a creature without fear.
JOB 41:34 It looks on every haughty being; it is king over all that are proud.”
JOB 42:1 Then Job answered the Lord:
JOB 42:2 “I know that you can do all things; no purpose of yours can be thwarted;
JOB 42:3 you asked, ‘Who is this who darkens counsel without knowledge?’ But I have declared without understanding things too wonderful for me to know.
JOB 42:4 You said, ‘Pay attention, and I will speak; I will question you, and you will answer me.’
JOB 42:5 I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye has seen you.
JOB 42:6 Therefore I despise myself, and I repent in dust and ashes!
JOB 42:7 After the Lord had spoken these things to Job, he said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My anger is stirred up against you and your two friends, because you have not spoken about me what is right, as my servant Job has.
JOB 42:8 So now take seven bulls and seven rams and go to my servant Job and offer a burnt offering for yourselves. And my servant Job will intercede for you, and I will respect him, so that I do not deal with you according to your folly, because you have not spoken about me what is right, as my servant Job has.”
JOB 42:9 So they went, Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, and did just as the Lord had told them; and the Lord had respect for Job.
JOB 42:10 So the Lord restored what Job had lost after he prayed for his friends, and the Lord doubled all that had belonged to Job.
JOB 42:11 So they came to him, all his brothers and sisters and all who had known him before, and they dined with him in his house. They comforted him and consoled him for all the trouble the Lord had brought on him, and each one gave him a piece of silver and a gold ring.
JOB 42:12 So the Lord blessed the second part of Job’s life more than the first. He had 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 yoke of oxen, and 1,000 female donkeys.
JOB 42:13 And he also had seven sons and three daughters.
JOB 42:14 The first daughter he named Jemimah, the second Keziah, and the third Keren-Happuch.
JOB 42:15 Nowhere in all the land could women be found who were as beautiful as Job’s daughters, and their father granted them an inheritance alongside their brothers.
JOB 42:16 After this Job lived 140 years; he saw his children and their children to the fourth generation.
JOB 42:17 And so Job died, old and full of days.
PSA 1:1 How blessed is the one who does not follow the advice of the wicked, or stand in the pathway with sinners, or sit in the assembly of scoffers!
PSA 1:2 Instead he finds pleasure in obeying the Lord’s commands; he meditates on his commands day and night.
PSA 1:3 He is like a tree planted by flowing streams; it yields its fruit at the proper time, and its leaves never fall off. He succeeds in everything he attempts.
PSA 1:4 Not so with the wicked! Instead they are like wind-driven chaff.
PSA 1:5 For this reason the wicked cannot withstand judgment, nor can sinners join the assembly of the godly.
PSA 1:6 Certainly the Lord guards the way of the godly, but the way of the wicked ends in destruction.
PSA 2:1 Why do the nations rebel? Why are the countries devising plots that will fail?
PSA 2:2 The kings of the earth form a united front; the rulers collaborate against the Lord and his anointed king.
PSA 2:3 They say, “Let’s tear off the shackles they’ve put on us! Let’s free ourselves from their ropes!”
PSA 2:4 The one enthroned in heaven laughs in disgust; the Lord taunts them.
PSA 2:5 Then he angrily speaks to them and terrifies them in his rage, saying,
PSA 2:6 “I myself have installed my king on Zion, my holy hill.”
PSA 2:7 The king says, “I will announce the Lord’s decree. He said to me: ‘You are my son! This very day I have become your father!
PSA 2:8 Ask me, and I will give you the nations as your inheritance, the ends of the earth as your personal property.
PSA 2:9 You will break them with an iron scepter; you will smash them like a potter’s jar!’”
PSA 2:10 So now, you kings, do what is wise; you rulers of the earth, submit to correction!
PSA 2:11 Serve the Lord in fear! Repent in terror!
PSA 2:12 Give sincere homage! Otherwise he will be angry, and you will die because of your behavior, when his anger quickly ignites. How blessed are all who take shelter in him!
PSA 3:1 A psalm of David, written when he fled from his son Absalom. Lord, how numerous are my enemies! Many attack me.
PSA 3:2 Many say about me, “God will not deliver him.” (Selah)
PSA 3:3 But you, Lord, are a shield that protects me; you are my glory and the one who restores me.
PSA 3:4 To the Lord I cried out, and he answered me from his holy hill. (Selah)
PSA 3:5 I rested and slept; I awoke, for the Lord protects me.
PSA 3:6 I am not afraid of the multitude of people who attack me from all directions.
PSA 3:7 Rise up, Lord! Deliver me, my God! Yes, you will strike all my enemies on the jaw; you will break the teeth of the wicked.
PSA 3:8 The Lord delivers; you show favor to your people. (Selah)
PSA 4:1 For the music director, to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a psalm of David. When I call out, answer me, O God who vindicates me! Though I am hemmed in, you will lead me into a wide, open place. Have mercy on me and respond to my prayer!
PSA 4:2 You men, how long will you try to turn my honor into shame? How long will you love what is worthless and search for what is deceptive? (Selah)
PSA 4:3 Realize that the Lord shows the godly special favor; the Lord responds when I cry out to him.
PSA 4:4 Tremble with fear and do not sin! Meditate as you lie in bed, and repent of your ways! (Selah)
PSA 4:5 Offer the prescribed sacrifices and trust in the Lord!
PSA 4:6 Many say, “Who can show us anything good?” Smile upon us, Lord!
PSA 4:7 You make me happier than those who have abundant grain and wine.
PSA 4:8 I will lie down and sleep peacefully, for you, Lord, make me safe and secure.
PSA 5:1 For the music director, to be accompanied by wind instruments; a psalm of David. Listen to what I say, Lord! Carefully consider my complaint!
PSA 5:2 Pay attention to my cry for help, my king and my God, for I am praying to you!
PSA 5:3 Lord, in the morning you will hear me; in the morning I will present my case to you and then wait expectantly for an answer.
PSA 5:4 Certainly you are not a God who approves of evil; evil people cannot dwell with you.
PSA 5:5 Arrogant people cannot stand in your presence; you hate all who behave wickedly.
PSA 5:6 You destroy liars; the Lord despises violent and deceitful people.
PSA 5:7 But as for me, because of your great faithfulness I will enter your house; I will bow down toward your holy temple as I worship you.
PSA 5:8 Lord, lead me in your righteousness because of those who wait to ambush me, remove the obstacles in the way in which you are guiding me!
PSA 5:9 For they do not speak the truth; their stomachs are like the place of destruction, their throats like an open grave, their tongues like a steep slope leading into it.
PSA 5:10 Condemn them, O God! May their own schemes be their downfall! Drive them away because of their many acts of insurrection, for they have rebelled against you.
PSA 5:11 But may all who take shelter in you be happy! May they continually shout for joy! Shelter them so that those who are loyal to you may rejoice!
PSA 5:12 Certainly you reward the godly, Lord. Like a shield you protect them in your good favor.
PSA 6:1 For the music director, to be accompanied by stringed instruments, according to the sheminith style; a psalm of David. Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger! Do not discipline me in your raging fury!
PSA 6:2 Have mercy on me, Lord, for I am frail! Heal me, Lord, for my bones are shaking!
PSA 6:3 I am absolutely terrified, and you, Lord – how long will this continue?
PSA 6:4 Relent, Lord, rescue me! Deliver me because of your faithfulness!
PSA 6:5 For no one remembers you in the realm of death, In Sheol who gives you thanks?
PSA 6:6 I am exhausted as I groan; all night long I drench my bed in tears; my tears saturate the cushion beneath me.
PSA 6:7 My eyes grow dim from suffering; they grow weak because of all my enemies.
PSA 6:8 Turn back from me, all you who behave wickedly, for the Lord has heard the sound of my weeping!
PSA 6:9 The Lord has heard my appeal for mercy; the Lord has accepted my prayer.
PSA 6:10 May all my enemies be humiliated and absolutely terrified! May they turn back and be suddenly humiliated!
PSA 7:1 A musical composition by David, which he sang to the Lord concerning a Benjaminite named Cush. O Lord my God, in you I have taken shelter. Deliver me from all who chase me! Rescue me!
PSA 7:2 Otherwise they will rip me to shreds like a lion; they will tear me to bits and no one will be able to rescue me.
PSA 7:3 O Lord my God, if I have done what they say, or am guilty of unjust actions,
PSA 7:4 or have wronged my ally, or helped his lawless enemy,
PSA 7:5 may an enemy relentlessly chase me and catch me; may he trample me to death and leave me lying dishonored in the dust. (Selah)
PSA 7:6 Stand up angrily, Lord! Rise up with raging fury against my enemies! Wake up for my sake and execute the judgment you have decreed for them!
PSA 7:7 The countries are assembled all around you; take once more your rightful place over them!
PSA 7:8 The Lord judges the nations. Vindicate me, Lord, because I am innocent, because I am blameless, O Exalted One!
PSA 7:9 May the evil deeds of the wicked come to an end! But make the innocent secure, O righteous God, you who examine inner thoughts and motives!
PSA 7:10 The Exalted God is my shield, the one who delivers the morally upright.
PSA 7:11 God is a just judge; he is angry throughout the day.
PSA 7:12 If a person does not repent, God sharpens his sword and prepares to shoot his bow.
PSA 7:13 He prepares to use deadly weapons against him; he gets ready to shoot flaming arrows.
PSA 7:14 See the one who is pregnant with wickedness, who conceives destructive plans, and gives birth to harmful lies –
PSA 7:15 he digs a pit and then falls into the hole he has made.
PSA 7:16 He becomes the victim of his own destructive plans and the violence he intended for others falls on his own head.
PSA 7:17 I will thank the Lord for his justice; I will sing praises to the sovereign Lord!
PSA 8:1 For the music director, according to the gittith style; a psalm of David. O Lord, our Lord, how magnificent is your reputation throughout the earth! You reveal your majesty in the heavens above!
PSA 8:2 From the mouths of children and nursing babies you have ordained praise on account of your adversaries, so that you might put an end to the vindictive enemy.
PSA 8:3 When I look up at the heavens, which your fingers made, and see the moon and the stars, which you set in place,
PSA 8:4 Of what importance is the human race, that you should notice them? Of what importance is mankind, that you should pay attention to them,
PSA 8:5 and make them a little less than the heavenly beings? You grant mankind honor and majesty;
PSA 8:6 you appoint them to rule over your creation; you have placed everything under their authority,
PSA 8:7 including all the sheep and cattle, as well as the wild animals,
PSA 8:8 the birds in the sky, the fish in the sea and everything that moves through the currents of the seas.
PSA 8:9 O Lord, our Lord, how magnificent is your reputation throughout the earth!
PSA 9:1 For the music director; according to the alumoth-labben style; a psalm of David. I will thank the Lord with all my heart! I will tell about all your amazing deeds!
PSA 9:2 I will be happy and rejoice in you! I will sing praises to you, O sovereign One!
PSA 9:3 When my enemies turn back, they trip and are defeated before you.
PSA 9:4 For you defended my just cause; from your throne you pronounced a just decision.
PSA 9:5 You terrified the nations with your battle cry; you destroyed the wicked; you permanently wiped out all memory of them.
PSA 9:6 The enemy’s cities have been reduced to permanent ruins; you destroyed their cities; all memory of the enemies has perished.
PSA 9:7 But the Lord rules forever; he reigns in a just manner.
PSA 9:8 He judges the world fairly; he makes just legal decisions for the nations.
PSA 9:9 Consequently the Lord provides safety for the oppressed; he provides safety in times of trouble.
PSA 9:10 Your loyal followers trust in you, for you, Lord, do not abandon those who seek your help.
PSA 9:11 Sing praises to the Lord, who rules in Zion! Tell the nations what he has done!
PSA 9:12 For the one who takes revenge against murderers took notice of the oppressed; he did not overlook their cry for help
PSA 9:13 when they prayed: “Have mercy on me, Lord! See how I am oppressed by those who hate me, O one who can snatch me away from the gates of death!
PSA 9:14 Then I will tell about all your praiseworthy acts; in the gates of Daughter Zion I will rejoice because of your deliverance.”
PSA 9:15 The nations fell into the pit they had made; their feet were caught in the net they had hidden.
PSA 9:16 The Lord revealed himself; he accomplished justice; the wicked were ensnared by their own actions. (Higgaion. Selah)
PSA 9:17 The wicked are turned back and sent to Sheol; this is the destiny of all the nations that ignore God,
PSA 9:18 for the needy are not permanently ignored, the hopes of the oppressed are not forever dashed.
PSA 9:19 Rise up, Lord! Don’t let men be defiant! May the nations be judged in your presence!
PSA 9:20 Terrify them, Lord! Let the nations know they are mere mortals! (Selah)
PSA 10:1 Why, Lord, do you stand far off? Why do you pay no attention during times of trouble?
PSA 10:2 The wicked arrogantly chase the oppressed; the oppressed are trapped by the schemes the wicked have dreamed up.
PSA 10:3 Yes, the wicked man boasts because he gets what he wants; the one who robs others curses and rejects the Lord.
PSA 10:4 The wicked man is so arrogant he always thinks, “God won’t hold me accountable; he doesn’t care.”
PSA 10:5 He is secure at all times. He has no regard for your commands; he disdains all his enemies.
PSA 10:6 He says to himself, “I will never be upended, because I experience no calamity.”
PSA 10:7 His mouth is full of curses and deceptive, harmful words; his tongue injures and destroys.
PSA 10:8 He waits in ambush near the villages; in hidden places he kills the innocent. His eyes look for some unfortunate victim.
PSA 10:9 He lies in ambush in a hidden place, like a lion in a thicket; he lies in ambush, waiting to catch the oppressed; he catches the oppressed by pulling in his net.
PSA 10:10 His victims are crushed and beaten down; they are trapped in his sturdy nets.
PSA 10:11 He says to himself, “God overlooks it; he does not pay attention; he never notices.”
PSA 10:12 Rise up, Lord! O God, strike him down! Do not forget the oppressed!
PSA 10:13 Why does the wicked man reject God? He says to himself, “You will not hold me accountable.”
PSA 10:14 You have taken notice, for you always see one who inflicts pain and suffering. The unfortunate victim entrusts his cause to you; you deliver the fatherless.
PSA 10:15 Break the arm of the wicked and evil man! Hold him accountable for his wicked deeds, which he thought you would not discover.
PSA 10:16 The Lord rules forever! The nations are driven out of his land.
PSA 10:17 Lord, you have heard the request of the oppressed; you make them feel secure because you listen to their prayer.
PSA 10:18 You defend the fatherless and oppressed, so that mere mortals may no longer terrorize them.
PSA 11:1 For the music director; by David. In the Lord I have taken shelter. How can you say to me, “Flee to a mountain like a bird!
PSA 11:2 For look, the wicked prepare their bows, they put their arrows on the strings, to shoot in the darkness at the morally upright.
PSA 11:3 When the foundations are destroyed, what can the godly accomplish?”
PSA 11:4 The Lord is in his holy temple; the Lord’s throne is in heaven. His eyes watch; his eyes examine all people.
PSA 11:5 The Lord approves of the godly, but he hates the wicked and those who love to do violence.
PSA 11:6 May the Lord rain down burning coals and brimstone on the wicked! A whirlwind is what they deserve!
PSA 11:7 Certainly the Lord is just; he rewards godly deeds; the upright will experience his favor.
PSA 12:1 For the music director; according to the sheminith style; a psalm of David. Deliver, Lord! For the godly have disappeared; people of integrity have vanished.
PSA 12:2 People lie to one another; they flatter and deceive.
PSA 12:3 May the Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that boasts!
PSA 12:4 They say, “We speak persuasively; we know how to flatter and boast. Who is our master?”
PSA 12:5 “Because of the violence done to the oppressed, because of the painful cries of the needy, I will spring into action,” says the Lord. “I will provide the safety they so desperately desire.”
PSA 12:6 The Lord’s words are absolutely reliable. They are as untainted as silver purified in a furnace on the ground, where it is thoroughly refined.
PSA 12:7 You, Lord, will protect them; you will continually shelter each one from these evil people,
PSA 12:8 for the wicked seem to be everywhere, when people promote evil.
PSA 13:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. How long, Lord, will you continue to ignore me? How long will you pay no attention to me?
PSA 13:2 How long must I worry, and suffer in broad daylight? How long will my enemy gloat over me?
PSA 13:3 Look at me! Answer me, O Lord my God! Revive me, or else I will die!
PSA 13:4 Then my enemy will say, “I have defeated him!” Then my foes will rejoice because I am upended.
PSA 13:5 But I trust in your faithfulness. May I rejoice because of your deliverance!
PSA 13:6 I will sing praises to the Lord when he vindicates me.
PSA 14:1 For the music director; by David. Fools say to themselves, “There is no God.” They sin and commit evil deeds; none of them does what is right.
PSA 14:2 The Lord looks down from heaven at the human race, to see if there is anyone who is wise and seeks God.
PSA 14:3 Everyone rejects God; they are all morally corrupt. None of them does what is right, not even one!
PSA 14:4 All those who behave wickedly do not understand – those who devour my people as if they were eating bread, and do not call out to the Lord.
PSA 14:5 They are absolutely terrified, for God defends the godly.
PSA 14:6 You want to humiliate the oppressed, even though the Lord is their shelter.
PSA 14:7 I wish the deliverance of Israel would come from Zion! When the Lord restores the well-being of his people, may Jacob rejoice, may Israel be happy!
PSA 15:1 A psalm of David. Lord, who may be a guest in your home? Who may live on your holy hill?
PSA 15:2 Whoever lives a blameless life, does what is right, and speaks honestly.
PSA 15:3 He does not slander, or do harm to others, or insult his neighbor.
PSA 15:4 He despises a reprobate, but honors the Lord’s loyal followers. He makes firm commitments and does not renege on his promise.
PSA 15:5 He does not charge interest when he lends his money. He does not take bribes to testify against the innocent. The one who lives like this will never be upended.
PSA 16:1 A prayer of David. Protect me, O God, for I have taken shelter in you.
PSA 16:2 I say to the Lord, “You are the Lord, my only source of well-being.”
PSA 16:3 As for God’s chosen people who are in the land, and the leading officials I admired so much –
PSA 16:4 their troubles multiply, they desire other gods. I will not pour out drink offerings of blood to their gods, nor will I make vows in the name of their gods.
PSA 16:5 Lord, you give me stability and prosperity; you make my future secure.
PSA 16:6 It is as if I have been given fertile fields or received a beautiful tract of land.
PSA 16:7 I will praise the Lord who guides me; yes, during the night I reflect and learn.
PSA 16:8 I constantly trust in the Lord; because he is at my right hand, I will not be upended.
PSA 16:9 So my heart rejoices and I am happy; My life is safe.
PSA 16:10 You will not abandon me to Sheol; you will not allow your faithful follower to see the Pit.
PSA 16:11 You lead me in the path of life; I experience absolute joy in your presence; you always give me sheer delight.
PSA 17:1 A prayer of David. Lord, consider my just cause! Pay attention to my cry for help! Listen to the prayer I sincerely offer!
PSA 17:2 Make a just decision on my behalf! Decide what is right!
PSA 17:3 You have scrutinized my inner motives; you have examined me during the night. You have carefully evaluated me, but you find no sin. I am determined I will say nothing sinful.
PSA 17:4 As for the actions of people – just as you have commanded, I have not followed in the footsteps of violent men.
PSA 17:5 I carefully obey your commands; I do not deviate from them.
PSA 17:6 I call to you for you will answer me, O God. Listen to me! Hear what I say!
PSA 17:7 Accomplish awesome, faithful deeds, you who powerfully deliver those who look to you for protection from their enemies.
PSA 17:8 Protect me as you would protect the pupil of your eye! Hide me in the shadow of your wings!
PSA 17:9 Protect me from the wicked men who attack me, my enemies who crowd around me for the kill.
PSA 17:10 They are calloused; they speak arrogantly.
PSA 17:11 They attack me, now they surround me; they intend to throw me to the ground.
PSA 17:12 He is like a lion that wants to tear its prey to bits, like a young lion crouching in hidden places.
PSA 17:13 Rise up, Lord! Confront him! Knock him down! Use your sword to rescue me from the wicked man!
PSA 17:14 Lord, use your power to deliver me from these murderers, from the murderers of this world! They enjoy prosperity; you overwhelm them with the riches they desire. They have many children, and leave their wealth to their offspring.
PSA 17:15 As for me, because I am innocent I will see your face; when I awake you will reveal yourself to me.
PSA 18:1 For the music director; by the Lord’s servant David, who sang to the Lord the words of this song when the Lord rescued him from the power of all his enemies, including Saul. He said: “I love you, Lord, my source of strength!
PSA 18:2 The Lord is my high ridge, my stronghold, my deliverer. My God is my rocky summit where I take shelter, my shield, the horn that saves me, and my refuge.
PSA 18:3 I called to the Lord, who is worthy of praise, and I was delivered from my enemies.
PSA 18:4 The waves of death engulfed me, the currents of chaos overwhelmed me.
PSA 18:5 The ropes of Sheol tightened around me, the snares of death trapped me.
PSA 18:6 In my distress I called to the Lord; I cried out to my God. From his heavenly temple he heard my voice; he listened to my cry for help.
PSA 18:7 The earth heaved and shook; the roots of the mountains trembled; they heaved because he was angry.
PSA 18:8 Smoke ascended from his nose; fire devoured as it came from his mouth; he hurled down fiery coals.
PSA 18:9 He made the sky sink as he descended; a thick cloud was under his feet.
PSA 18:10 He mounted a winged angel and flew; he glided on the wings of the wind.
PSA 18:11 He shrouded himself in darkness, in thick rain clouds.
PSA 18:12 From the brightness in front of him came hail and fiery coals.
PSA 18:13 The Lord thundered in the sky; the sovereign One shouted.
PSA 18:14 He shot his arrows and scattered them, many lightning bolts and routed them.
PSA 18:15 The depths of the sea were exposed; the inner regions of the world were uncovered by your battle cry, Lord, by the powerful breath from your nose.
PSA 18:16 He reached down from above and took hold of me; he pulled me from the surging water.
PSA 18:17 He rescued me from my strong enemy, from those who hate me, for they were too strong for me.
PSA 18:18 They confronted me in my day of calamity, but the Lord helped me.
PSA 18:19 He brought me out into a wide open place; he delivered me because he was pleased with me.
PSA 18:20 The Lord repaid me for my godly deeds; he rewarded my blameless behavior.
PSA 18:21 For I have obeyed the Lord’s commands; I have not rebelled against my God.
PSA 18:22 For I am aware of all his regulations, and I do not reject his rules.
PSA 18:23 I was innocent before him, and kept myself from sinning.
PSA 18:24 The Lord rewarded me for my godly deeds; he took notice of my blameless behavior.
PSA 18:25 You prove to be loyal to one who is faithful; you prove to be trustworthy to one who is innocent.
PSA 18:26 You prove to be reliable to one who is blameless, but you prove to be deceptive to one who is perverse.
PSA 18:27 For you deliver oppressed people, but you bring down those who have a proud look.
PSA 18:28 Indeed, you are my lamp, Lord. My God illuminates the darkness around me.
PSA 18:29 Indeed, with your help I can charge against an army; by my God’s power I can jump over a wall.
PSA 18:30 The one true God acts in a faithful manner; the Lord’s promise is reliable; he is a shield to all who take shelter in him.
PSA 18:31 Indeed, who is God besides the Lord? Who is a protector besides our God?
PSA 18:32 The one true God gives me strength; he removes the obstacles in my way.
PSA 18:33 He gives me the agility of a deer; he enables me to negotiate the rugged terrain.
PSA 18:34 He trains my hands for battle; my arms can bend even the strongest bow.
PSA 18:35 You give me your protective shield; your right hand supports me; your willingness to help enables me to prevail.
PSA 18:36 You widen my path; my feet do not slip.
PSA 18:37 I chase my enemies and catch them; I do not turn back until I wipe them out.
PSA 18:38 I beat them to death; they fall at my feet.
PSA 18:39 You give me strength for battle; you make my foes kneel before me.
PSA 18:40 You make my enemies retreat; I destroy those who hate me.
PSA 18:41 They cry out, but there is no one to help them; they cry out to the Lord, but he does not answer them.
PSA 18:42 I grind them as fine windblown dust; I beat them underfoot like clay in the streets.
PSA 18:43 You rescue me from a hostile army; you make me a leader of nations; people over whom I had no authority are now my subjects.
PSA 18:44 When they hear of my exploits, they submit to me. Foreigners are powerless before me;
PSA 18:45 foreigners lose their courage; they shake with fear as they leave their strongholds.
PSA 18:46 The Lord is alive! My protector is praiseworthy! The God who delivers me is exalted as king!
PSA 18:47 The one true God completely vindicates me; he makes nations submit to me.
PSA 18:48 He delivers me from my enemies; you snatch me away from those who attack me; you rescue me from violent men.
PSA 18:49 So I will give you thanks before the nations, O Lord! I will sing praises to you!
PSA 18:50 He gives his chosen king magnificent victories; he is faithful to his chosen ruler, to David and his descendants forever.”
PSA 19:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. The heavens declare the glory of God; the sky displays his handiwork.
PSA 19:2 Day after day it speaks out; night after night it reveals his greatness.
PSA 19:3 There is no actual speech or word, nor is its voice literally heard.
PSA 19:4 Yet its voice echoes throughout the earth; its words carry to the distant horizon. In the sky he has pitched a tent for the sun.
PSA 19:5 Like a bridegroom it emerges from its chamber; like a strong man it enjoys running its course.
PSA 19:6 It emerges from the distant horizon, and goes from one end of the sky to the other; nothing can escape its heat.
PSA 19:7 The law of the Lord is perfect and preserves one’s life. The rules set down by the Lord are reliable and impart wisdom to the inexperienced.
PSA 19:8 The Lord’s precepts are fair and make one joyful. The Lord’s commands are pure and give insight for life.
PSA 19:9 The commands to fear the Lord are right and endure forever. The judgments given by the Lord are trustworthy and absolutely just.
PSA 19:10 They are of greater value than gold, than even a great amount of pure gold; they bring greater delight than honey, than even the sweetest honey from a honeycomb.
PSA 19:11 Yes, your servant finds moral guidance there; those who obey them receive a rich reward.
PSA 19:12 Who can know all his errors? Please do not punish me for sins I am unaware of.
PSA 19:13 Moreover, keep me from committing flagrant sins; do not allow such sins to control me. Then I will be blameless, and innocent of blatant rebellion.
PSA 19:14 May my words and my thoughts be acceptable in your sight, O Lord, my sheltering rock and my redeemer.
PSA 20:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. May the Lord answer you when you are in trouble; may the God of Jacob make you secure!
PSA 20:2 May he send you help from his temple; from Zion may he give you support!
PSA 20:3 May he take notice of your offerings; may he accept your burnt sacrifice! (Selah)
PSA 20:4 May he grant your heart’s desire; may he bring all your plans to pass!
PSA 20:5 Then we will shout for joy over your victory; we will rejoice in the name of our God! May the Lord grant all your requests!
PSA 20:6 Now I am sure that the Lord will deliver his chosen king; he will intervene for him from his holy heavenly temple, and display his mighty ability to deliver.
PSA 20:7 Some trust in chariots and others in horses, but we depend on the Lord our God.
PSA 20:8 They will fall down, but we will stand firm.
PSA 20:9 The Lord will deliver the king; he will answer us when we call to him for help!
PSA 21:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. O Lord, the king rejoices in the strength you give; he takes great delight in the deliverance you provide.
PSA 21:2 You grant him his heart’s desire; you do not refuse his request. (Selah)
PSA 21:3 For you bring him rich blessings; you place a golden crown on his head.
PSA 21:4 He asked you to sustain his life, and you have granted him long life and an enduring dynasty.
PSA 21:5 Your deliverance brings him great honor; you give him majestic splendor.
PSA 21:6 For you grant him lasting blessings; you give him great joy by allowing him into your presence.
PSA 21:7 For the king trusts in the Lord, and because of the sovereign Lord’s faithfulness he is not upended.
PSA 21:8 You prevail over all your enemies; your power is too great for those who hate you.
PSA 21:9 You burn them up like a fiery furnace when you appear; the Lord angrily devours them; the fire consumes them.
PSA 21:10 You destroy their offspring from the earth, their descendants from among the human race.
PSA 21:11 Yes, they intend to do you harm; they dream up a scheme, but they do not succeed.
PSA 21:12 For you make them retreat when you shoot your arrows at them.
PSA 21:13 Rise up, O Lord, in strength! We will sing and praise your power!
PSA 22:1 For the music director; according to the tune “Morning Doe;” a psalm of David. My God, my God, why have you abandoned me? I groan in prayer, but help seems far away.
PSA 22:2 My God, I cry out during the day, but you do not answer, and during the night my prayers do not let up.
PSA 22:3 You are holy; you sit as king receiving the praises of Israel.
PSA 22:4 In you our ancestors trusted; they trusted in you and you rescued them.
PSA 22:5 To you they cried out, and they were saved; in you they trusted and they were not disappointed.
PSA 22:6 But I am a worm, not a man; people insult me and despise me.
PSA 22:7 All who see me taunt me; they mock me and shake their heads.
PSA 22:8 They say, “Commit yourself to the Lord! Let the Lord rescue him! Let the Lord deliver him, for he delights in him.”
PSA 22:9 Yes, you are the one who brought me out from the womb and made me feel secure on my mother’s breasts.
PSA 22:10 I have been dependent on you since birth; from the time I came out of my mother’s womb you have been my God.
PSA 22:11 Do not remain far away from me, for trouble is near and I have no one to help me.
PSA 22:12 Many bulls surround me; powerful bulls of Bashan hem me in.
PSA 22:13 They open their mouths to devour me like a roaring lion that rips its prey.
PSA 22:14 My strength drains away like water; all my bones are dislocated; my heart is like wax; it melts away inside me.
PSA 22:15 The roof of my mouth is as dry as a piece of pottery; my tongue sticks to my gums. You set me in the dust of death.
PSA 22:16 Yes, wild dogs surround me – a gang of evil men crowd around me; like a lion they pin my hands and feet.
PSA 22:17 I can count all my bones; my enemies are gloating over me in triumph.
PSA 22:18 They are dividing up my clothes among themselves; they are rolling dice for my garments.
PSA 22:19 But you, O Lord, do not remain far away! You are my source of strength! Hurry and help me!
PSA 22:20 Deliver me from the sword! Save my life from the claws of the wild dogs!
PSA 22:21 Rescue me from the mouth of the lion, and from the horns of the wild oxen! You have answered me!
PSA 22:22 I will declare your name to my countrymen! In the middle of the assembly I will praise you!
PSA 22:23 You loyal followers of the Lord, praise him! All you descendants of Jacob, honor him! All you descendants of Israel, stand in awe of him!
PSA 22:24 For he did not despise or detest the suffering of the oppressed; he did not ignore him; when he cried out to him, he responded.
PSA 22:25 You are the reason I offer praise in the great assembly; I will fulfill my promises before the Lord’s loyal followers.
PSA 22:26 Let the oppressed eat and be filled! Let those who seek his help praise the Lord! May you live forever!
PSA 22:27 Let all the people of the earth acknowledge the Lord and turn to him! Let all the nations worship you!
PSA 22:28 For the Lord is king and rules over the nations.
PSA 22:29 All of the thriving people of the earth will join the celebration and worship; all those who are descending into the grave will bow before him, including those who cannot preserve their lives.
PSA 22:30 A whole generation will serve him; they will tell the next generation about the sovereign Lord.
PSA 22:31 They will come and tell about his saving deeds; they will tell a future generation what he has accomplished.
PSA 23:1 A psalm of David. The Lord is my shepherd, I lack nothing.
PSA 23:2 He takes me to lush pastures, he leads me to refreshing water.
PSA 23:3 He restores my strength. He leads me down the right paths for the sake of his reputation.
PSA 23:4 Even when I must walk through the darkest valley, I fear no danger, for you are with me; your rod and your staff reassure me.
PSA 23:5 You prepare a feast before me in plain sight of my enemies. You refresh my head with oil; my cup is completely full.
PSA 23:6 Surely your goodness and faithfulness will pursue me all my days, and I will live in the Lord’s house for the rest of my life.
PSA 24:1 A psalm of David. The Lord owns the earth and all it contains, the world and all who live in it.
PSA 24:2 For he set its foundation upon the seas, and established it upon the ocean currents.
PSA 24:3 Who is allowed to ascend the mountain of the Lord? Who may go up to his holy dwelling place?
PSA 24:4 The one whose deeds are blameless and whose motives are pure, who does not lie, or make promises with no intention of keeping them.
PSA 24:5 Such godly people are rewarded by the Lord, and vindicated by the God who delivers them.
PSA 24:6 Such purity characterizes the people who seek his favor, Jacob’s descendants, who pray to him. (Selah)
PSA 24:7 Look up, you gates! Rise up, you eternal doors! Then the majestic king will enter!
PSA 24:8 Who is this majestic king? The Lord who is strong and mighty! The Lord who is mighty in battle!
PSA 24:9 Look up, you gates! Rise up, you eternal doors! Then the majestic king will enter!
PSA 24:10 Who is this majestic king? The Lord who commands armies! He is the majestic king! (Selah)
PSA 25:1 By David. O Lord, I come before you in prayer.
PSA 25:2 My God, I trust in you. Please do not let me be humiliated; do not let my enemies triumphantly rejoice over me!
PSA 25:3 Certainly none who rely on you will be humiliated. Those who deal in treachery will be thwarted and humiliated.
PSA 25:4 Make me understand your ways, O Lord! Teach me your paths!
PSA 25:5 Guide me into your truth and teach me. For you are the God who delivers me; on you I rely all day long.
PSA 25:6 Remember your compassionate and faithful deeds, O Lord, for you have always acted in this manner.
PSA 25:7 Do not hold against me the sins of my youth or my rebellious acts! Because you are faithful to me, extend to me your favor, O Lord!
PSA 25:8 The Lord is both kind and fair; that is why he teaches sinners the right way to live.
PSA 25:9 May he show the humble what is right! May he teach the humble his way!
PSA 25:10 The Lord always proves faithful and reliable to those who follow the demands of his covenant.
PSA 25:11 For the sake of your reputation, O Lord, forgive my sin, because it is great.
PSA 25:12 The Lord shows his faithful followers the way they should live.
PSA 25:13 They experience his favor; their descendants inherit the land.
PSA 25:14 The Lord’s loyal followers receive his guidance, and he reveals his covenantal demands to them.
PSA 25:15 I continually look to the Lord for help, for he will free my feet from the enemy’s net.
PSA 25:16 Turn toward me and have mercy on me, for I am alone and oppressed!
PSA 25:17 Deliver me from my distress; rescue me from my suffering!
PSA 25:18 See my pain and suffering! Forgive all my sins!
PSA 25:19 Watch my enemies, for they outnumber me; they hate me and want to harm me.
PSA 25:20 Protect me and deliver me! Please do not let me be humiliated, for I have taken shelter in you!
PSA 25:21 May integrity and godliness protect me, for I rely on you!
PSA 25:22 O God, rescue Israel from all their distress!
PSA 26:1 By David. Vindicate me, O Lord, for I have integrity, and I trust in the Lord without wavering.
PSA 26:2 Examine me, O Lord, and test me! Evaluate my inner thoughts and motives!
PSA 26:3 For I am ever aware of your faithfulness, and your loyalty continually motivates me.
PSA 26:4 I do not associate with deceitful men, or consort with those who are dishonest.
PSA 26:5 I hate the mob of evil men, and do not associate with the wicked.
PSA 26:6 I maintain a pure lifestyle, so I can appear before your altar, O Lord,
PSA 26:7 to give you thanks, and to tell about all your amazing deeds.
PSA 26:8 O Lord, I love the temple where you live, the place where your splendor is revealed.
PSA 26:9 Do not sweep me away with sinners, or execute me along with violent people,
PSA 26:10 who are always ready to do wrong or offer a bribe.
PSA 26:11 But I have integrity! Rescue me and have mercy on me!
PSA 26:12 I am safe, and among the worshipers I will praise the Lord.
PSA 27:1 By David. The Lord delivers and vindicates me! I fear no one! The Lord protects my life! I am afraid of no one!
PSA 27:2 When evil men attack me to devour my flesh, when my adversaries and enemies attack me, they stumble and fall.
PSA 27:3 Even when an army is deployed against me, I do not fear. Even when war is imminent, I remain confident.
PSA 27:4 I have asked the Lord for one thing – this is what I desire! I want to live in the Lord’s house all the days of my life, so I can gaze at the splendor of the Lord and contemplate in his temple.
PSA 27:5 He will surely give me shelter in the day of danger; he will hide me in his home; he will place me on an inaccessible rocky summit.
PSA 27:6 Now I will triumph over my enemies who surround me! I will offer sacrifices in his dwelling place and shout for joy! I will sing praises to the Lord!
PSA 27:7 Hear me, O Lord, when I cry out! Have mercy on me and answer me!
PSA 27:8 My heart tells me to pray to you, and I do pray to you, O Lord.
PSA 27:9 Do not reject me! Do not push your servant away in anger! You are my deliverer! Do not forsake or abandon me, O God who vindicates me!
PSA 27:10 Even if my father and mother abandoned me, the Lord would take me in.
PSA 27:11 Teach me how you want me to live; lead me along a level path because of those who wait to ambush me!
PSA 27:12 Do not turn me over to my enemies, for false witnesses who want to destroy me testify against me.
PSA 27:13 Where would I be if I did not believe I would experience the Lord’s favor in the land of the living?
PSA 27:14 Rely on the Lord! Be strong and confident! Rely on the Lord!
PSA 28:1 By David. To you, O Lord, I cry out! My protector, do not ignore me! If you do not respond to me, I will join those who are descending into the grave.
PSA 28:2 Hear my plea for mercy when I cry out to you for help, when I lift my hands toward your holy temple!
PSA 28:3 Do not drag me away with evil men, with those who behave wickedly, who talk so friendly to their neighbors, while they plan to harm them!
PSA 28:4 Pay them back for their evil deeds! Pay them back for what they do! Punish them!
PSA 28:5 For they do not understand the Lord’s actions, or the way he carries out justice. The Lord will permanently demolish them.
PSA 28:6 The Lord deserves praise, for he has heard my plea for mercy!
PSA 28:7 The Lord strengthens and protects me; I trust in him with all my heart. I am rescued and my heart is full of joy; I will sing to him in gratitude.
PSA 28:8 The Lord strengthens his people; he protects and delivers his chosen king.
PSA 28:9 Deliver your people! Empower the nation that belongs to you! Care for them like a shepherd and carry them in your arms at all times!
PSA 29:1 A psalm of David. Acknowledge the Lord, you heavenly beings, acknowledge the Lord’s majesty and power!
PSA 29:2 Acknowledge the majesty of the Lord’s reputation! Worship the Lord in holy attire!
PSA 29:3 The Lord’s shout is heard over the water; the majestic God thunders, the Lord appears over the surging water.
PSA 29:4 The Lord’s shout is powerful, the Lord’s shout is majestic.
PSA 29:5 The Lord’s shout breaks the cedars, the Lord shatters the cedars of Lebanon.
PSA 29:6 He makes Lebanon skip like a calf and Sirion like a young ox.
PSA 29:7 The Lord’s shout strikes with flaming fire.
PSA 29:8 The Lord’s shout shakes the wilderness, the Lord shakes the wilderness of Kadesh.
PSA 29:9 The Lord’s shout bends the large trees and strips the leaves from the forests. Everyone in his temple says, “Majestic!”
PSA 29:10 The Lord sits enthroned over the engulfing waters, the Lord sits enthroned as the eternal king.
PSA 29:11 The Lord gives his people strength; the Lord grants his people security.
PSA 30:1 A psalm – a song used at the dedication of the temple; by David. I will praise you, O Lord, for you lifted me up, and did not allow my enemies to gloat over me.
PSA 30:2 O Lord my God, I cried out to you and you healed me.
PSA 30:3 O Lord, you pulled me up from Sheol; you rescued me from among those descending into the grave.
PSA 30:4 Sing to the Lord, you faithful followers of his; give thanks to his holy name.
PSA 30:5 For his anger lasts only a brief moment, and his good favor restores one’s life. One may experience sorrow during the night, but joy arrives in the morning.
PSA 30:6 In my self-confidence I said, “I will never be upended.”
PSA 30:7 O Lord, in your good favor you made me secure. Then you rejected me and I was terrified.
PSA 30:8 To you, O Lord, I cried out; I begged the Lord for mercy:
PSA 30:9 “What profit is there in taking my life, in my descending into the Pit? Can the dust of the grave praise you? Can it declare your loyalty?
PSA 30:10 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy on me! O Lord, deliver me!”
PSA 30:11 Then you turned my lament into dancing; you removed my sackcloth and covered me with joy.
PSA 30:12 So now my heart will sing to you and not be silent; O Lord my God, I will always give thanks to you.
PSA 31:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. In you, O Lord, I have taken shelter! Never let me be humiliated! Vindicate me by rescuing me!
PSA 31:2 Listen to me! Quickly deliver me! Be my protector and refuge, a stronghold where I can be safe!
PSA 31:3 For you are my high ridge and my stronghold; for the sake of your own reputation you lead me and guide me.
PSA 31:4 You will free me from the net they hid for me, for you are my place of refuge.
PSA 31:5 Into your hand I entrust my life; you will rescue me, O Lord, the faithful God.
PSA 31:6 I hate those who serve worthless idols, but I trust in the Lord.
PSA 31:7 I will be happy and rejoice in your faithfulness, because you notice my pain and you are aware of how distressed I am.
PSA 31:8 You do not deliver me over to the power of the enemy; you enable me to stand in a wide open place.
PSA 31:9 Have mercy on me, for I am in distress! My eyes grow dim from suffering. I have lost my strength.
PSA 31:10 For my life nears its end in pain; my years draw to a close as I groan. My strength fails me because of my sin, and my bones become brittle.
PSA 31:11 Because of all my enemies, people disdain me; my neighbors are appalled by my suffering – those who know me are horrified by my condition; those who see me in the street run away from me.
PSA 31:12 I am forgotten, like a dead man no one thinks about; I am regarded as worthless, like a broken jar.
PSA 31:13 For I hear what so many are saying, the terrifying news that comes from every direction. When they plot together against me, they figure out how they can take my life.
PSA 31:14 But I trust in you, O Lord! I declare, “You are my God!”
PSA 31:15 You determine my destiny! Rescue me from the power of my enemies and those who chase me.
PSA 31:16 Smile on your servant! Deliver me because of your faithfulness!
PSA 31:17 O Lord, do not let me be humiliated, for I call out to you! May evil men be humiliated! May they go wailing to the grave!
PSA 31:18 May lying lips be silenced – lips that speak defiantly against the innocent with arrogance and contempt!
PSA 31:19 How great is your favor, which you store up for your loyal followers! In plain sight of everyone you bestow it on those who take shelter in you.
PSA 31:20 You hide them with you, where they are safe from the attacks of men; you conceal them in a shelter, where they are safe from slanderous attacks.
PSA 31:21 The Lord deserves praise for he demonstrated his amazing faithfulness to me when I was besieged by enemies.
PSA 31:22 I jumped to conclusions and said, “I am cut off from your presence!” But you heard my plea for mercy when I cried out to you for help.
PSA 31:23 Love the Lord, all you faithful followers of his! The Lord protects those who have integrity, but he pays back in full the one who acts arrogantly.
PSA 31:24 Be strong and confident, all you who wait on the Lord!
PSA 32:1 By David; a well-written song. How blessed is the one whose rebellious acts are forgiven, whose sin is pardoned!
PSA 32:2 How blessed is the one whose wrongdoing the Lord does not punish, in whose spirit there is no deceit.
PSA 32:3 When I refused to confess my sin, my whole body wasted away, while I groaned in pain all day long.
PSA 32:4 For day and night you tormented me; you tried to destroy me in the intense heat of summer. (Selah)
PSA 32:5 Then I confessed my sin; I no longer covered up my wrongdoing. I said, “I will confess my rebellious acts to the Lord.” And then you forgave my sins. (Selah)
PSA 32:6 For this reason every one of your faithful followers should pray to you while there is a window of opportunity. Certainly when the surging water rises, it will not reach them.
PSA 32:7 You are my hiding place; you protect me from distress. You surround me with shouts of joy from those celebrating deliverance. (Selah)
PSA 32:8 I will instruct and teach you about how you should live. I will advise you as I look you in the eye.
PSA 32:9 Do not be like an unintelligent horse or mule, which will not obey you unless they are controlled by a bridle and bit.
PSA 32:10 An evil person suffers much pain, but the Lord’s faithfulness overwhelms the one who trusts in him.
PSA 32:11 Rejoice in the Lord and be happy, you who are godly! Shout for joy, all you who are morally upright!
PSA 33:1 You godly ones, shout for joy because of the Lord! It is appropriate for the morally upright to offer him praise.
PSA 33:2 Give thanks to the Lord with the harp! Sing to him to the accompaniment of a ten-stringed instrument!
PSA 33:3 Sing to him a new song! Play skillfully as you shout out your praises to him!
PSA 33:4 For the Lord’s decrees are just, and everything he does is fair.
PSA 33:5 The Lord promotes equity and justice; the Lord’s faithfulness extends throughout the earth.
PSA 33:6 By the Lord’s decree the heavens were made; by a mere word from his mouth all the stars in the sky were created.
PSA 33:7 He piles up the water of the sea; he puts the oceans in storehouses.
PSA 33:8 Let the whole earth fear the Lord! Let all who live in the world stand in awe of him!
PSA 33:9 For he spoke, and it came into existence, he issued the decree, and it stood firm.
PSA 33:10 The Lord frustrates the decisions of the nations; he nullifies the plans of the peoples.
PSA 33:11 The Lord’s decisions stand forever; his plans abide throughout the ages.
PSA 33:12 How blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, the people whom he has chosen to be his special possession.
PSA 33:13 The Lord watches from heaven; he sees all people.
PSA 33:14 From the place where he lives he looks carefully at all the earth’s inhabitants.
PSA 33:15 He is the one who forms every human heart, and takes note of all their actions.
PSA 33:16 No king is delivered by his vast army; a warrior is not saved by his great might.
PSA 33:17 A horse disappoints those who trust in it for victory; despite its great strength, it cannot deliver.
PSA 33:18 Look, the Lord takes notice of his loyal followers, those who wait for him to demonstrate his faithfulness
PSA 33:19 by saving their lives from death and sustaining them during times of famine.
PSA 33:20 We wait for the Lord; he is our deliverer and shield.
PSA 33:21 For our hearts rejoice in him, for we trust in his holy name.
PSA 33:22 May we experience your faithfulness, O Lord, for we wait for you.
PSA 34:1 Written by David, when he pretended to be insane before Abimelech, causing the king to send him away. I will praise the Lord at all times; my mouth will continually praise him.
PSA 34:2 I will boast in the Lord; let the oppressed hear and rejoice!
PSA 34:3 Magnify the Lord with me! Let’s praise his name together!
PSA 34:4 I sought the Lord’s help and he answered me; he delivered me from all my fears.
PSA 34:5 Those who look to him for help are happy; their faces are not ashamed.
PSA 34:6 This oppressed man cried out and the Lord heard; he saved him from all his troubles.
PSA 34:7 The Lord’s angel camps around the Lord’s loyal followers and delivers them.
PSA 34:8 Taste and see that the Lord is good! How blessed is the one who takes shelter in him!
PSA 34:9 Remain loyal to the Lord, you chosen people of his, for his loyal followers lack nothing!
PSA 34:10 Even young lions sometimes lack food and are hungry, but those who seek the Lord lack no good thing.
PSA 34:11 Come children! Listen to me! I will teach you what it means to fear the Lord.
PSA 34:12 Do you want to really live? Would you love to live a long, happy life?
PSA 34:13 Then make sure you don’t speak evil words or use deceptive speech!
PSA 34:14 Turn away from evil and do what is right! Strive for peace and promote it!
PSA 34:15 The Lord pays attention to the godly and hears their cry for help.
PSA 34:16 But the Lord opposes evildoers and wipes out all memory of them from the earth.
PSA 34:17 The godly cry out and the Lord hears; he saves them from all their troubles.
PSA 34:18 The Lord is near the brokenhearted; he delivers those who are discouraged.
PSA 34:19 The godly face many dangers, but the Lord saves them from each one of them.
PSA 34:20 He protects all his bones; not one of them is broken.
PSA 34:21 Evil people self-destruct; those who hate the godly are punished.
PSA 34:22 The Lord rescues his servants; all who take shelter in him escape punishment.
PSA 35:1 By David. O Lord, fight those who fight with me! Attack those who attack me!
PSA 35:2 Grab your small shield and large shield, and rise up to help me!
PSA 35:3 Use your spear and lance against those who chase me! Assure me with these words: “I am your deliverer!”
PSA 35:4 May those who seek my life be embarrassed and humiliated! May those who plan to harm me be turned back and ashamed!
PSA 35:5 May they be like wind-driven chaff, as the Lord’s angel attacks them!
PSA 35:6 May their path be dark and slippery, as the Lord’s angel chases them!
PSA 35:7 I did not harm them, but they hid a net to catch me and dug a pit to trap me.
PSA 35:8 Let destruction take them by surprise! Let the net they hid catch them! Let them fall into destruction!
PSA 35:9 Then I will rejoice in the Lord and be happy because of his deliverance.
PSA 35:10 With all my strength I will say, “O Lord, who can compare to you? You rescue the oppressed from those who try to overpower them; the oppressed and needy from those who try to rob them.”
PSA 35:11 Violent men perjure themselves, and falsely accuse me.
PSA 35:12 They repay me evil for the good I have done; I am overwhelmed with sorrow.
PSA 35:13 When they were sick, I wore sackcloth, and refrained from eating food. (If I am lying, may my prayers go unanswered!)
PSA 35:14 I mourned for them as I would for a friend or my brother. I bowed down in sorrow as if I were mourning for my mother.
PSA 35:15 But when I stumbled, they rejoiced and gathered together; they gathered together to ambush me. They tore at me without stopping to rest.
PSA 35:16 When I tripped, they taunted me relentlessly, and tried to bite me.
PSA 35:17 O Lord, how long are you going to just stand there and watch this? Rescue me from their destructive attacks; guard my life from the young lions!
PSA 35:18 Then I will give you thanks in the great assembly; I will praise you before a large crowd of people!
PSA 35:19 Do not let those who are my enemies for no reason gloat over me! Do not let those who hate me without cause carry out their wicked schemes!
PSA 35:20 For they do not try to make peace with others, but plan ways to deceive those who are unsuspecting.
PSA 35:21 They are ready to devour me; they say, “Aha! Aha! We’ve got you!”
PSA 35:22 But you take notice, Lord! O Lord, do not remain far away from me!
PSA 35:23 Rouse yourself, wake up and vindicate me! My God and Lord, defend my just cause!
PSA 35:24 Vindicate me by your justice, O Lord my God! Do not let them gloat over me!
PSA 35:25 Do not let them say to themselves, “Aha! We have what we wanted!” Do not let them say, “We have devoured him!”
PSA 35:26 May those who want to harm me be totally embarrassed and ashamed! May those who arrogantly taunt me be covered with shame and humiliation!
PSA 35:27 May those who desire my vindication shout for joy and rejoice! May they continually say, “May the Lord be praised, for he wants his servant to be secure.”
PSA 35:28 Then I will tell others about your justice, and praise you all day long.
PSA 36:1 For the music director; written by the Lord’s servant, David; an oracle. An evil man is rebellious to the core. He does not fear God,
PSA 36:2 for he is too proud to recognize and give up his sin.
PSA 36:3 The words he speaks are sinful and deceitful; he does not care about doing what is wise and right.
PSA 36:4 He plans ways to sin while he lies in bed; he is committed to a sinful lifestyle; he does not reject what is evil.
PSA 36:5 O Lord, your loyal love reaches to the sky; your faithfulness to the clouds.
PSA 36:6 Your justice is like the highest mountains, your fairness like the deepest sea; you preserve mankind and the animal kingdom.
PSA 36:7 How precious is your loyal love, O God! The human race finds shelter under your wings.
PSA 36:8 They are filled with food from your house, and you allow them to drink from the river of your delicacies.
PSA 36:9 For you are the one who gives and sustains life.
PSA 36:10 Extend your loyal love to your faithful followers, and vindicate the morally upright!
PSA 36:11 Do not let arrogant men overtake me, or let evil men make me homeless!
PSA 36:12 I can see the evildoers! They have fallen! They have been knocked down and are unable to get up!
PSA 37:1 By David. Do not fret when wicked men seem to succeed! Do not envy evildoers!
PSA 37:2 For they will quickly dry up like grass, and wither away like plants.
PSA 37:3 Trust in the Lord and do what is right! Settle in the land and maintain your integrity!
PSA 37:4 Then you will take delight in the Lord, and he will answer your prayers.
PSA 37:5 Commit your future to the Lord! Trust in him, and he will act on your behalf.
PSA 37:6 He will vindicate you in broad daylight, and publicly defend your just cause.
PSA 37:7 Wait patiently for the Lord! Wait confidently for him! Do not fret over the apparent success of a sinner, a man who carries out wicked schemes!
PSA 37:8 Do not be angry and frustrated! Do not fret! That only leads to trouble!
PSA 37:9 Wicked men will be wiped out, but those who rely on the Lord are the ones who will possess the land.
PSA 37:10 Evil men will soon disappear; you will stare at the spot where they once were, but they will be gone.
PSA 37:11 But the oppressed will possess the land and enjoy great prosperity.
PSA 37:12 Evil men plot against the godly and viciously attack them.
PSA 37:13 The Lord laughs in disgust at them, for he knows that their day is coming.
PSA 37:14 Evil men draw their swords and prepare their bows, to bring down the oppressed and needy, and to slaughter those who are godly.
PSA 37:15 Their swords will pierce their own hearts, and their bows will be broken.
PSA 37:16 The little bit that a godly man owns is better than the wealth of many evil men,
PSA 37:17 for evil men will lose their power, but the Lord sustains the godly.
PSA 37:18 The Lord watches over the innocent day by day and they possess a permanent inheritance.
PSA 37:19 They will not be ashamed when hard times come; when famine comes they will have enough to eat.
PSA 37:20 But evil men will die; the Lord’s enemies will be incinerated – they will go up in smoke.
PSA 37:21 Evil men borrow, but do not repay their debt, but the godly show compassion and are generous.
PSA 37:22 Surely those favored by the Lord will possess the land, but those rejected by him will be wiped out.
PSA 37:23 The Lord grants success to the one whose behavior he finds commendable.
PSA 37:24 Even if he trips, he will not fall headlong, for the Lord holds his hand.
PSA 37:25 I was once young, now I am old. I have never seen a godly man abandoned, or his children forced to search for food.
PSA 37:26 All day long he shows compassion and lends to others, and his children are blessed.
PSA 37:27 Turn away from evil! Do what is right! Then you will enjoy lasting security.
PSA 37:28 For the Lord promotes justice, and never abandons his faithful followers. They are permanently secure, but the children of evil men are wiped out.
PSA 37:29 The godly will possess the land and will dwell in it permanently.
PSA 37:30 The godly speak wise words and promote justice.
PSA 37:31 The law of their God controls their thinking; their feet do not slip.
PSA 37:32 Evil men set an ambush for the godly and try to kill them.
PSA 37:33 But the Lord does not surrender the godly, or allow them to be condemned in a court of law.
PSA 37:34 Rely on the Lord! Obey his commands! Then he will permit you to possess the land; you will see the demise of evil men.
PSA 37:35 I have seen ruthless evil men growing in influence, like a green tree grows in its native soil.
PSA 37:36 But then one passes by, and suddenly they have disappeared! I looked for them, but they could not be found.
PSA 37:37 Take note of the one who has integrity! Observe the godly! For the one who promotes peace has a future.
PSA 37:38 Sinful rebels are totally destroyed; evil men have no future.
PSA 37:39 But the Lord delivers the godly; he protects them in times of trouble.
PSA 37:40 The Lord helps them and rescues them; he rescues them from evil men and delivers them, for they seek his protection.
PSA 38:1 A psalm of David, written to get God’s attention. O Lord, do not continue to rebuke me in your anger! Do not continue to punish me in your raging fury!
PSA 38:2 For your arrows pierce me, and your hand presses me down.
PSA 38:3 My whole body is sick because of your judgment; I am deprived of health because of my sin.
PSA 38:4 For my sins overwhelm me; like a heavy load, they are too much for me to bear.
PSA 38:5 My wounds are infected and starting to smell, because of my foolish sins.
PSA 38:6 I am dazed and completely humiliated; all day long I walk around mourning.
PSA 38:7 For I am overcome with shame and my whole body is sick.
PSA 38:8 I am numb with pain and severely battered; I groan loudly because of the anxiety I feel.
PSA 38:9 O Lord, you understand my heart’s desire; my groaning is not hidden from you.
PSA 38:10 My heart beats quickly; my strength leaves me; I can hardly see.
PSA 38:11 Because of my condition, even my friends and acquaintances keep their distance; my neighbors stand far away.
PSA 38:12 Those who seek my life try to entrap me; those who want to harm me speak destructive words; all day long they say deceitful things.
PSA 38:13 But I am like a deaf man – I hear nothing; I am like a mute who cannot speak.
PSA 38:14 I am like a man who cannot hear and is incapable of arguing his defense.
PSA 38:15 Yet I wait for you, O Lord! You will respond, O Lord, my God!
PSA 38:16 I have prayed for deliverance, because otherwise they will gloat over me; when my foot slips they will arrogantly taunt me.
PSA 38:17 For I am about to stumble, and I am in constant pain.
PSA 38:18 Yes, I confess my wrongdoing, and I am concerned about my sins.
PSA 38:19 But those who are my enemies for no reason are numerous; those who hate me without cause outnumber me.
PSA 38:20 They repay me evil for the good I have done; though I have tried to do good to them, they hurl accusations at me.
PSA 38:21 Do not abandon me, O Lord! My God, do not remain far away from me!
PSA 38:22 Hurry and help me, O Lord, my deliverer!
PSA 39:1 For the music director, Jeduthun; a psalm of David. I decided, “I will watch what I say and make sure I do not sin with my tongue. I will put a muzzle over my mouth while in the presence of an evil man.”
PSA 39:2 I was stone silent; I held back the urge to speak. My frustration grew;
PSA 39:3 my anxiety intensified. As I thought about it, I became impatient. Finally I spoke these words:
PSA 39:4 “O Lord, help me understand my mortality and the brevity of life! Let me realize how quickly my life will pass!
PSA 39:5 Look, you make my days short-lived, and my life span is nothing from your perspective. Surely all people, even those who seem secure, are nothing but vapor.
PSA 39:6 Surely people go through life as mere ghosts. Surely they accumulate worthless wealth without knowing who will eventually haul it away.”
PSA 39:7 But now, O Lord, upon what am I relying? You are my only hope!
PSA 39:8 Deliver me from all my sins of rebellion! Do not make me the object of fools’ insults!
PSA 39:9 I am silent and cannot open my mouth because of what you have done.
PSA 39:10 Please stop wounding me! You have almost beaten me to death!
PSA 39:11 You severely discipline people for their sins; like a moth you slowly devour their strength. Surely all people are a mere vapor. (Selah)
PSA 39:12 Hear my prayer, O Lord! Listen to my cry for help! Do not ignore my sobbing! For I am dependent on you, like one residing outside his native land; I am at your mercy, just as all my ancestors were.
PSA 39:13 Turn your angry gaze away from me, so I can be happy before I pass away.
PSA 40:1 For the music director; By David, a psalm. I relied completely on the Lord, and he turned toward me and heard my cry for help.
PSA 40:2 He lifted me out of the watery pit, out of the slimy mud. He placed my feet on a rock and gave me secure footing.
PSA 40:3 He gave me reason to sing a new song, praising our God. May many see what God has done, so that they might swear allegiance to him and trust in the Lord!
PSA 40:4 How blessed is the one who trusts in the Lord and does not seek help from the proud or from liars!
PSA 40:5 O Lord, my God, you have accomplished many things; you have done amazing things and carried out your purposes for us. No one can thwart you! I want to declare them and talk about them, but they are too numerous to recount!
PSA 40:6 Receiving sacrifices and offerings are not your primary concern. You make that quite clear to me! You do not ask for burnt sacrifices and sin offerings.
PSA 40:7 Then I say, “Look! I come! What is written in the scroll pertains to me.
PSA 40:8 I want to do what pleases you, my God. Your law dominates my thoughts.”
PSA 40:9 I have told the great assembly about your justice. Look! I spare no words! O Lord, you know this is true.
PSA 40:10 I have not failed to tell about your justice; I spoke about your reliability and deliverance; I have not neglected to tell the great assembly about your loyal love and faithfulness.
PSA 40:11 O Lord, you do not withhold your compassion from me. May your loyal love and faithfulness continually protect me!
PSA 40:12 For innumerable dangers surround me. My sins overtake me so I am unable to see; they outnumber the hairs of my head so my strength fails me.
PSA 40:13 Please be willing, O Lord, to rescue me! O Lord, hurry and help me!
PSA 40:14 May those who are trying to snatch away my life be totally embarrassed and ashamed! May those who want to harm me be turned back and ashamed!
PSA 40:15 May those who say to me, “Aha! Aha!” be humiliated and disgraced!
PSA 40:16 May all those who seek you be happy and rejoice in you! May those who love to experience your deliverance say continually, “May the Lord be praised!”
PSA 40:17 I am oppressed and needy! May the Lord pay attention to me! You are my helper and my deliverer! O my God, do not delay!
PSA 41:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. How blessed is the one who treats the poor properly! When trouble comes, the Lord delivers him.
PSA 41:2 May the Lord protect him and save his life! May he be blessed in the land! Do not turn him over to his enemies!
PSA 41:3 The Lord supports him on his sickbed; you completely heal him from his illness.
PSA 41:4 As for me, I said: “O Lord, have mercy on me! Heal me, for I have sinned against you!
PSA 41:5 My enemies ask this cruel question about me, ‘When will he finally die and be forgotten?’
PSA 41:6 When someone comes to visit, he pretends to be friendly; he thinks of ways to defame me, and when he leaves he slanders me.
PSA 41:7 All who hate me whisper insults about me to one another; they plan ways to harm me.
PSA 41:8 They say, ‘An awful disease overwhelms him, and now that he is bed-ridden he will never recover.’
PSA 41:9 Even my close friend whom I trusted, he who shared meals with me, has turned against me.
PSA 41:10 As for you, O Lord, have mercy on me and raise me up, so I can pay them back!”
PSA 41:11 By this I know that you are pleased with me, for my enemy does not triumph over me.
PSA 41:12 As for me, you uphold me because of my integrity; you allow me permanent access to your presence.
PSA 41:13 The Lord God of Israel deserves praise in the future and forevermore! We agree! We agree!
PSA 42:1 For the music director; a well-written song by the Korahites. As a deer longs for streams of water, so I long for you, O God!
PSA 42:2 I thirst for God, for the living God. I say, “When will I be able to go and appear in God’s presence?”
PSA 42:3 I cannot eat, I weep day and night; all day long they say to me, “Where is your God?”
PSA 42:4 I will remember and weep! For I was once walking along with the great throng to the temple of God, shouting and giving thanks along with the crowd as we celebrated the holy festival.
PSA 42:5 Why are you depressed, O my soul? Why are you upset? Wait for God! For I will again give thanks to my God for his saving intervention.
PSA 42:6 I am depressed, so I will pray to you while I am trapped here in the region of the upper Jordan, from Hermon, from Mount Mizar.
PSA 42:7 One deep stream calls out to another at the sound of your waterfalls; all your billows and waves overwhelm me.
PSA 42:8 By day the Lord decrees his loyal love, and by night he gives me a song, a prayer to the living God.
PSA 42:9 I will pray to God, my high ridge: “Why do you ignore me? Why must I walk around mourning because my enemies oppress me?”
PSA 42:10 My enemies’ taunts cut into me to the bone, as they say to me all day long, “Where is your God?”
PSA 42:11 Why are you depressed, O my soul? Why are you upset? Wait for God! For I will again give thanks to my God for his saving intervention.
PSA 43:1 Vindicate me, O God! Fight for me against an ungodly nation! Deliver me from deceitful and evil men!
PSA 43:2 For you are the God who shelters me. Why do you reject me? Why must I walk around mourning because my enemies oppress me?
PSA 43:3 Reveal your light and your faithfulness! They will lead me, they will escort me back to your holy hill, and to the place where you live.
PSA 43:4 Then I will go to the altar of God, to the God who gives me ecstatic joy, so that I express my thanks to you, O God, my God, with a harp.
PSA 43:5 Why are you depressed, O my soul? Why are you upset? Wait for God! For I will again give thanks to my God for his saving intervention.
PSA 44:1 For the music director; by the Korahites, a well-written song. O God, we have clearly heard; our ancestors have told us what you did in their days, in ancient times.
PSA 44:2 You, by your power, defeated nations and settled our fathers on their land; you crushed the people living there and enabled our ancestors to occupy it.
PSA 44:3 For they did not conquer the land by their swords, and they did not prevail by their strength, but rather by your power, strength and good favor, for you were partial to them.
PSA 44:4 You are my king, O God! Decree Jacob’s deliverance!
PSA 44:5 By your power we will drive back our enemies; by your strength we will trample down our foes!
PSA 44:6 For I do not trust in my bow, and I do not prevail by my sword.
PSA 44:7 For you deliver us from our enemies; you humiliate those who hate us.
PSA 44:8 In God I boast all day long, and we will continually give thanks to your name. (Selah)
PSA 44:9 But you rejected and embarrassed us! You did not go into battle with our armies.
PSA 44:10 You made us retreat from the enemy. Those who hate us take whatever they want from us.
PSA 44:11 You handed us over like sheep to be eaten; you scattered us among the nations.
PSA 44:12 You sold your people for a pittance; you did not ask a high price for them.
PSA 44:13 You made us an object of disdain to our neighbors; those who live on our borders taunt and insult us.
PSA 44:14 You made us an object of ridicule among the nations; foreigners treat us with contempt.
PSA 44:15 All day long I feel humiliated and am overwhelmed with shame,
PSA 44:16 before the vindictive enemy who ridicules and insults me.
PSA 44:17 All this has happened to us, even though we have not rejected you or violated your covenant with us.
PSA 44:18 We have not been unfaithful, nor have we disobeyed your commands.
PSA 44:19 Yet you have battered us, leaving us a heap of ruins overrun by wild dogs; you have covered us with darkness.
PSA 44:20 If we had rejected our God, and spread out our hands in prayer to another god,
PSA 44:21 would not God discover it, for he knows one’s thoughts?
PSA 44:22 Yet because of you we are killed all day long; we are treated like sheep at the slaughtering block.
PSA 44:23 Rouse yourself! Why do you sleep, O Lord? Wake up! Do not reject us forever!
PSA 44:24 Why do you look the other way, and ignore the way we are oppressed and mistreated?
PSA 44:25 For we lie in the dirt, with our bellies pressed to the ground.
PSA 44:26 Rise up and help us! Rescue us because of your loyal love!
PSA 45:1 For the music director; according to the tune of “Lilies;” by the Korahites, a well-written poem, a love song. My heart is stirred by a beautiful song. I say, “I have composed this special song for the king; my tongue is as skilled as the stylus of an experienced scribe.”
PSA 45:2 You are the most handsome of all men! You speak in an impressive and fitting manner! For this reason God grants you continual blessings.
PSA 45:3 Strap your sword to your thigh, O warrior! Appear in your majestic splendor!
PSA 45:4 Appear in your majesty and be victorious! Ride forth for the sake of what is right, on behalf of justice! Then your right hand will accomplish mighty acts!
PSA 45:5 Your arrows are sharp and penetrate the hearts of the king’s enemies. Nations fall at your feet.
PSA 45:6 Your throne, O God, is permanent. The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of justice.
PSA 45:7 You love justice and hate evil. For this reason God, your God has anointed you with the oil of joy, elevating you above your companions.
PSA 45:8 All your garments are perfumed with myrrh, aloes, and cassia. From the luxurious palaces comes the music of stringed instruments that makes you happy.
PSA 45:9 Princesses are among your honored guests, your bride stands at your right hand, wearing jewelry made with gold from Ophir.
PSA 45:10 Listen, O princess! Observe and pay attention! Forget your homeland and your family!
PSA 45:11 Then the king will be attracted by your beauty. After all, he is your master! Submit to him!
PSA 45:12 Rich people from Tyre will seek your favor by bringing a gift.
PSA 45:13 The princess looks absolutely magnificent, decked out in pearls and clothed in a brocade trimmed with gold.
PSA 45:14 In embroidered robes she is escorted to the king. Her attendants, the maidens of honor who follow her, are led before you.
PSA 45:15 They are bubbling with joy as they walk in procession and enter the royal palace.
PSA 45:16 Your sons will carry on the dynasty of your ancestors; you will make them princes throughout the land.
PSA 45:17 I will proclaim your greatness through the coming years, then the nations will praise you forever.
PSA 46:1 For the music director; by the Korahites; according to the alamoth style; a song. God is our strong refuge; he is truly our helper in times of trouble.
PSA 46:2 For this reason we do not fear when the earth shakes, and the mountains tumble into the depths of the sea,
PSA 46:3 when its waves crash and foam, and the mountains shake before the surging sea. (Selah)
PSA 46:4 The river’s channels bring joy to the city of God, the special, holy dwelling place of the sovereign One.
PSA 46:5 God lives within it, it cannot be moved. God rescues it at the break of dawn.
PSA 46:6 Nations are in uproar, kingdoms are overthrown. God gives a shout, the earth dissolves.
PSA 46:7 The Lord who commands armies is on our side! The God of Jacob is our protector! (Selah)
PSA 46:8 Come! Witness the exploits of the Lord, who brings devastation to the earth!
PSA 46:9 He brings an end to wars throughout the earth; he shatters the bow and breaks the spear; he burns the shields with fire.
PSA 46:10 He says, “Stop your striving and recognize that I am God! I will be exalted over the nations! I will be exalted over the earth!”
PSA 46:11 The Lord who commands armies is on our side! The God of Jacob is our protector! (Selah)
PSA 47:1 For the music director; by the Korahites; a psalm. All you nations, clap your hands! Shout out to God in celebration!
PSA 47:2 For the sovereign Lord is awe-inspiring; he is the great king who rules the whole earth!
PSA 47:3 He subdued nations beneath us and countries under our feet.
PSA 47:4 He picked out for us a special land to be a source of pride for Jacob, whom he loves. (Selah)
PSA 47:5 God has ascended his throne amid loud shouts; the Lord has ascended his throne amid the blaring of ram’s horns.
PSA 47:6 Sing to God! Sing! Sing to our king! Sing!
PSA 47:7 For God is king of the whole earth! Sing a well-written song!
PSA 47:8 God reigns over the nations! God sits on his holy throne!
PSA 47:9 The nobles of the nations assemble, along with the people of the God of Abraham, for God has authority over the rulers of the earth. He is highly exalted!
PSA 48:1 A song, a psalm by the Korahites. The Lord is great and certainly worthy of praise in the city of our God, his holy hill.
PSA 48:2 It is lofty and pleasing to look at, a source of joy to the whole earth. Mount Zion resembles the peaks of Zaphon; it is the city of the great king.
PSA 48:3 God is in its fortresses; he reveals himself as its defender.
PSA 48:4 For look, the kings assemble; they advance together.
PSA 48:5 As soon as they see, they are shocked; they are terrified, they quickly retreat.
PSA 48:6 Look at them shake uncontrollably, like a woman writhing in childbirth.
PSA 48:7 With an east wind you shatter the large ships.
PSA 48:8 We heard about God’s mighty deeds, now we have seen them, in the city of the Lord, the invincible Warrior, in the city of our God. God makes it permanently secure. (Selah)
PSA 48:9 We reflect on your loyal love, O God, within your temple.
PSA 48:10 The praise you receive as far away as the ends of the earth is worthy of your reputation, O God. You execute justice!
PSA 48:11 Mount Zion rejoices; the towns of Judah are happy, because of your acts of judgment.
PSA 48:12 Walk around Zion! Encircle it! Count its towers!
PSA 48:13 Consider its defenses! Walk through its fortresses, so you can tell the next generation about it!
PSA 48:14 For God, our God, is our defender forever! He guides us!
PSA 49:1 For the music director, a psalm by the Korahites. Listen to this, all you nations! Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the world!
PSA 49:2 Pay attention, all you people, both rich and poor!
PSA 49:3 I will declare a wise saying; I will share my profound thoughts.
PSA 49:4 I will learn a song that imparts wisdom; I will then sing my insightful song to the accompaniment of a harp.
PSA 49:5 Why should I be afraid in times of trouble, when the sinful deeds of deceptive men threaten to overwhelm me?
PSA 49:6 They trust in their wealth and boast in their great riches.
PSA 49:7 Certainly a man cannot rescue his brother; he cannot pay God an adequate ransom price
PSA 49:8 (the ransom price for a human life is too high, and people go to their final destiny),
PSA 49:9 so that he might continue to live forever and not experience death.
PSA 49:10 Surely one sees that even wise people die; fools and spiritually insensitive people all pass away and leave their wealth to others.
PSA 49:11 Their grave becomes their permanent residence, their eternal dwelling place. They name their lands after themselves,
PSA 49:12 but, despite their wealth, people do not last, they are like animals that perish.
PSA 49:13 This is the destiny of fools, and of those who approve of their philosophy. (Selah)
PSA 49:14 They will travel to Sheol like sheep, with death as their shepherd. The godly will rule over them when the day of vindication dawns; Sheol will consume their bodies and they will no longer live in impressive houses.
PSA 49:15 But God will rescue my life from the power of Sheol; certainly he will pull me to safety. (Selah)
PSA 49:16 Do not be afraid when a man becomes rich and his wealth multiplies!
PSA 49:17 For he will take nothing with him when he dies; his wealth will not follow him down into the grave.
PSA 49:18 He pronounces this blessing on himself while he is alive: “May men praise you, for you have done well!”
PSA 49:19 But he will join his ancestors; they will never again see the light of day.
PSA 49:20 Wealthy people do not understand; they are like animals that perish.
PSA 50:1 A psalm by Asaph. El, God, the Lord speaks, and summons the earth to come from the east and west.
PSA 50:2 From Zion, the most beautiful of all places, God comes in splendor.
PSA 50:3 Our God approaches and is not silent; consuming fire goes ahead of him and all around him a storm rages.
PSA 50:4 He summons the heavens above, as well as the earth, so that he might judge his people.
PSA 50:5 He says: “Assemble my covenant people before me, those who ratified a covenant with me by sacrifice!”
PSA 50:6 The heavens declare his fairness, for God is judge. (Selah)
PSA 50:7 He says: “Listen my people! I am speaking! Listen Israel! I am accusing you! I am God, your God!
PSA 50:8 I am not condemning you because of your sacrifices, or because of your burnt sacrifices that you continually offer me.
PSA 50:9 I do not need to take a bull from your household or goats from your sheepfolds.
PSA 50:10 For every wild animal in the forest belongs to me, as well as the cattle that graze on a thousand hills.
PSA 50:11 I keep track of every bird in the hills, and the insects of the field are mine.
PSA 50:12 Even if I were hungry, I would not tell you, for the world and all it contains belong to me.
PSA 50:13 Do I eat the flesh of bulls? Do I drink the blood of goats?
PSA 50:14 Present to God a thank-offering! Repay your vows to the sovereign One!
PSA 50:15 Pray to me when you are in trouble! I will deliver you, and you will honor me!”
PSA 50:16 God says this to the evildoer: “How can you declare my commands, and talk about my covenant?
PSA 50:17 For you hate instruction and reject my words.
PSA 50:18 When you see a thief, you join him; you associate with men who are unfaithful to their wives.
PSA 50:19 You do damage with words, and use your tongue to deceive.
PSA 50:20 You plot against your brother; you slander your own brother.
PSA 50:21 When you did these things, I was silent, so you thought I was exactly like you. But now I will condemn you and state my case against you!
PSA 50:22 Carefully consider this, you who reject God! Otherwise I will rip you to shreds and no one will be able to rescue you.
PSA 50:23 Whoever presents a thank-offering honors me. To whoever obeys my commands, I will reveal my power to deliver.”
PSA 51:1 For the music director; a psalm of David, written when Nathan the prophet confronted him after David’s affair with Bathsheba. Have mercy on me, O God, because of your loyal love! Because of your great compassion, wipe away my rebellious acts!
PSA 51:2 Wash away my wrongdoing! Cleanse me of my sin!
PSA 51:3 For I am aware of my rebellious acts; I am forever conscious of my sin.
PSA 51:4 Against you – you above all – I have sinned; I have done what is evil in your sight. So you are just when you confront me; you are right when you condemn me.
PSA 51:5 Look, I was guilty of sin from birth, a sinner the moment my mother conceived me.
PSA 51:6 Look, you desire integrity in the inner man; you want me to possess wisdom.
PSA 51:7 Sprinkle me with water and I will be pure; wash me and I will be whiter than snow.
PSA 51:8 Grant me the ultimate joy of being forgiven! May the bones you crushed rejoice!
PSA 51:9 Hide your face from my sins! Wipe away all my guilt!
PSA 51:10 Create for me a pure heart, O God! Renew a resolute spirit within me!
PSA 51:11 Do not reject me! Do not take your Holy Spirit away from me!
PSA 51:12 Let me again experience the joy of your deliverance! Sustain me by giving me the desire to obey!
PSA 51:13 Then I will teach rebels your merciful ways, and sinners will turn to you.
PSA 51:14 Rescue me from the guilt of murder, O God, the God who delivers me! Then my tongue will shout for joy because of your deliverance.
PSA 51:15 O Lord, give me the words! Then my mouth will praise you.
PSA 51:16 Certainly you do not want a sacrifice, or else I would offer it; you do not desire a burnt sacrifice.
PSA 51:17 The sacrifices God desires are a humble spirit – O God, a humble and repentant heart you will not reject.
PSA 51:18 Because you favor Zion, do what is good for her! Fortify the walls of Jerusalem!
PSA 51:19 Then you will accept the proper sacrifices, burnt sacrifices and whole offerings; then bulls will be sacrificed on your altar.
PSA 52:1 For the music director; a well-written song by David. It was written when Doeg the Edomite went and informed Saul: “David has arrived at the home of Ahimelech.” Why do you boast about your evil plans, O powerful man? God’s loyal love protects me all day long!
PSA 52:2 Your tongue carries out your destructive plans; it is as effective as a sharp razor, O deceiver.
PSA 52:3 You love evil more than good, lies more than speaking the truth. (Selah)
PSA 52:4 You love to use all the words that destroy, and the tongue that deceives.
PSA 52:5 Yet God will make you a permanent heap of ruins. He will scoop you up and remove you from your home; he will uproot you from the land of the living. (Selah)
PSA 52:6 When the godly see this, they will be filled with awe, and will mock the evildoer, saying:
PSA 52:7 “Look, here is the man who would not make God his protector! He trusted in his great wealth and was confident about his plans to destroy others.”
PSA 52:8 But I am like a flourishing olive tree in the house of God; I continually trust in God’s loyal love.
PSA 52:9 I will continually thank you when you execute judgment; I will rely on you, for your loyal followers know you are good.
PSA 53:1 For the music director; according to the machalath style; a well-written song by David. Fools say to themselves, “There is no God.” They sin and commit evil deeds; none of them does what is right.
PSA 53:2 God looks down from heaven at the human race, to see if there is anyone who is wise and seeks God.
PSA 53:3 Everyone rejects God; they are all morally corrupt. None of them does what is right, not even one!
PSA 53:4 All those who behave wickedly do not understand – those who devour my people as if they were eating bread, and do not call out to God.
PSA 53:5 They are absolutely terrified, even by things that do not normally cause fear. For God annihilates those who attack you. You are able to humiliate them because God has rejected them.
PSA 53:6 I wish the deliverance of Israel would come from Zion! When God restores the well-being of his people, may Jacob rejoice, may Israel be happy!
PSA 54:1 For the music director, to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a well-written song by David. It was written when the Ziphites came and informed Saul: “David is hiding with us.” O God, deliver me by your name! Vindicate me by your power!
PSA 54:2 O God, listen to my prayer! Pay attention to what I say!
PSA 54:3 For foreigners attack me; ruthless men, who do not respect God, seek my life. (Selah)
PSA 54:4 Look, God is my deliverer! The Lord is among those who support me.
PSA 54:5 May those who wait to ambush me be repaid for their evil! As a demonstration of your faithfulness, destroy them!
PSA 54:6 With a freewill offering I will sacrifice to you! I will give thanks to your name, O Lord, for it is good!
PSA 54:7 Surely he rescues me from all trouble, and I triumph over my enemies.
PSA 55:1 For the music director, to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a well-written song by David. Listen, O God, to my prayer! Do not ignore my appeal for mercy!
PSA 55:2 Pay attention to me and answer me! I am so upset and distressed, I am beside myself,
PSA 55:3 because of what the enemy says, and because of how the wicked pressure me, for they hurl trouble down upon me and angrily attack me.
PSA 55:4 My heart beats violently within me; the horrors of death overcome me.
PSA 55:5 Fear and panic overpower me; terror overwhelms me.
PSA 55:6 I say, “I wish I had wings like a dove! I would fly away and settle in a safe place!
PSA 55:7 Look, I will escape to a distant place; I will stay in the wilderness. (Selah)
PSA 55:8 I will hurry off to a place that is safe from the strong wind and the gale.”
PSA 55:9 Confuse them, O Lord! Frustrate their plans! For I see violence and conflict in the city.
PSA 55:10 Day and night they walk around on its walls, while wickedness and destruction are within it.
PSA 55:11 Disaster is within it; violence and deceit do not depart from its public square.
PSA 55:12 Indeed, it is not an enemy who insults me, or else I could bear it; it is not one who hates me who arrogantly taunts me, or else I could hide from him.
PSA 55:13 But it is you, a man like me, my close friend in whom I confided.
PSA 55:14 We would share personal thoughts with each other; in God’s temple we would walk together among the crowd.
PSA 55:15 May death destroy them! May they go down alive into Sheol! For evil is in their dwelling place and in their midst.
PSA 55:16 As for me, I will call out to God, and the Lord will deliver me.
PSA 55:17 During the evening, morning, and noontime I will lament and moan, and he will hear me.
PSA 55:18 He will rescue me and protect me from those who attack me, even though they greatly outnumber me.
PSA 55:19 God, the one who has reigned as king from long ago, will hear and humiliate them. (Selah) They refuse to change, and do not fear God.
PSA 55:20 He attacks his friends; he breaks his solemn promises to them.
PSA 55:21 His words are as smooth as butter, but he harbors animosity in his heart. His words seem softer than oil, but they are really like sharp swords.
PSA 55:22 Throw your burden upon the Lord, and he will sustain you. He will never allow the godly to be upended.
PSA 55:23 But you, O God, will bring them down to the deep Pit. Violent and deceitful people will not live even half a normal lifespan. But as for me, I trust in you.
PSA 56:1 For the music director; according to the yonath-elem-rechovim style; a prayer of David, written when the Philistines captured him in Gath. Have mercy on me, O God, for men are attacking me! All day long hostile enemies are tormenting me.
PSA 56:2 Those who anticipate my defeat attack me all day long. Indeed, many are fighting against me, O Exalted One.
PSA 56:3 When I am afraid, I trust in you.
PSA 56:4 In God – I boast in his promise – in God I trust, I am not afraid. What can mere men do to me?
PSA 56:5 All day long they cause me trouble; they make a habit of plotting my demise.
PSA 56:6 They stalk and lurk; they watch my every step, as they prepare to take my life.
PSA 56:7 Because they are bent on violence, do not let them escape! In your anger bring down the nations, O God!
PSA 56:8 You keep track of my misery. Put my tears in your leather container! Are they not recorded in your scroll?
PSA 56:9 My enemies will turn back when I cry out to you for help; I know that God is on my side.
PSA 56:10 In God – I boast in his promise – in the Lord – I boast in his promise –
PSA 56:11 in God I trust, I am not afraid. What can mere men do to me?
PSA 56:12 I am obligated to fulfill the vows I made to you, O God; I will give you the thank-offerings you deserve,
PSA 56:13 when you deliver my life from death. You keep my feet from stumbling, so that I might serve God as I enjoy life.
PSA 57:1 For the music director; according to the al-tashcheth style; a prayer of David, written when he fled from Saul into the cave. Have mercy on me, O God! Have mercy on me! For in you I have taken shelter. In the shadow of your wings I take shelter until trouble passes.
PSA 57:2 I cry out for help to the sovereign God, to the God who vindicates me.
PSA 57:3 May he send help from heaven and deliver me from my enemies who hurl insults! (Selah) May God send his loyal love and faithfulness!
PSA 57:4 I am surrounded by lions; I lie down among those who want to devour me; men whose teeth are spears and arrows, whose tongues are a sharp sword.
PSA 57:5 Rise up above the sky, O God! May your splendor cover the whole earth!
PSA 57:6 They have prepared a net to trap me; I am discouraged. They have dug a pit for me. They will fall into it! (Selah)
PSA 57:7 I am determined, O God! I am determined! I will sing and praise you!
PSA 57:8 Awake, my soul! Awake, O stringed instrument and harp! I will wake up at dawn!
PSA 57:9 I will give you thanks before the nations, O Master! I will sing praises to you before foreigners!
PSA 57:10 For your loyal love extends beyond the sky, and your faithfulness reaches the clouds.
PSA 57:11 Rise up above the sky, O God! May your splendor cover the whole earth!
PSA 58:1 For the music director; according to the al-tashcheth style; a prayer of David. Do you rulers really pronounce just decisions? Do you judge people fairly?
PSA 58:2 No! You plan how to do what is unjust; you deal out violence in the earth.
PSA 58:3 The wicked turn aside from birth; liars go astray as soon as they are born.
PSA 58:4 Their venom is like that of a snake, like a deaf serpent that does not hear,
PSA 58:5 that does not respond to the magicians, or to a skilled snake-charmer.
PSA 58:6 O God, break the teeth in their mouths! Smash the jawbones of the lions, O Lord!
PSA 58:7 Let them disappear like water that flows away! Let them wither like grass!
PSA 58:8 Let them be like a snail that melts away as it moves along! Let them be like stillborn babies that never see the sun!
PSA 58:9 Before the kindling is even placed under your pots, he will sweep it away along with both the raw and cooked meat.
PSA 58:10 The godly will rejoice when they see vengeance carried out; they will bathe their feet in the blood of the wicked.
PSA 58:11 Then observers will say, “Yes indeed, the godly are rewarded! Yes indeed, there is a God who judges in the earth!”
PSA 59:1 For the music director; according to the al-tashcheth style; a prayer of David, written when Saul sent men to surround his house and murder him. Deliver me from my enemies, my God! Protect me from those who attack me!
PSA 59:2 Deliver me from evildoers! Rescue me from violent men!
PSA 59:3 For look, they wait to ambush me; powerful men stalk me, but not because I have rebelled or sinned, O Lord.
PSA 59:4 Though I have done nothing wrong, they are anxious to attack. Spring into action and help me! Take notice of me!
PSA 59:5 You, O Lord God, the invincible warrior, the God of Israel, rouse yourself and punish all the nations! Have no mercy on any treacherous evildoers! (Selah)
PSA 59:6 They return in the evening; they growl like a dog and prowl around outside the city.
PSA 59:7 Look, they hurl insults at me and openly threaten to kill me, for they say, “Who hears?”
PSA 59:8 But you, O Lord, laugh in disgust at them; you taunt all the nations.
PSA 59:9 You are my source of strength! I will wait for you! For God is my refuge.
PSA 59:10 The God who loves me will help me; God will enable me to triumph over my enemies.
PSA 59:11 Do not strike them dead suddenly, because then my people might forget the lesson. Use your power to make them homeless vagabonds and then bring them down, O Lord who shields us!
PSA 59:12 They speak sinful words. So let them be trapped by their own pride and by the curses and lies they speak!
PSA 59:13 Angrily wipe them out! Wipe them out so they vanish! Let them know that God rules in Jacob and to the ends of the earth! (Selah)
PSA 59:14 They return in the evening; they growl like a dog and prowl around outside the city.
PSA 59:15 They wander around looking for something to eat; they refuse to sleep until they are full.
PSA 59:16 As for me, I will sing about your strength; I will praise your loyal love in the morning. For you are my refuge and my place of shelter when I face trouble.
PSA 59:17 You are my source of strength! I will sing praises to you! For God is my refuge, the God who loves me.
PSA 60:1 For the music director; according to the shushan-eduth style; a prayer of David written to instruct others. It was written when he fought against Aram Naharaim and Aram-Zobah. That was when Joab turned back and struck down 12,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. O God, you have rejected us. You suddenly turned on us in your anger. Please restore us!
PSA 60:2 You made the earth quake; you split it open. Repair its breaches, for it is ready to fall.
PSA 60:3 You have made your people experience hard times; you have made us drink intoxicating wine.
PSA 60:4 You have given your loyal followers a rallying flag, so that they might seek safety from the bow. (Selah)
PSA 60:5 Deliver by your power and answer me, so that the ones you love may be safe.
PSA 60:6 God has spoken in his sanctuary: “I will triumph! I will parcel out Shechem; the Valley of Succoth I will measure off.
PSA 60:7 Gilead belongs to me, as does Manasseh! Ephraim is my helmet, Judah my royal scepter.
PSA 60:8 Moab is my washbasin. I will make Edom serve me. I will shout in triumph over Philistia.”
PSA 60:9 Who will lead me into the fortified city? Who will bring me to Edom?
PSA 60:10 Have you not rejected us, O God? O God, you do not go into battle with our armies.
PSA 60:11 Give us help against the enemy, for any help men might offer is futile.
PSA 60:12 By God’s power we will conquer; he will trample down our enemies.
PSA 61:1 For the music director; to be played on a stringed instrument; written by David. O God, hear my cry for help! Pay attention to my prayer!
PSA 61:2 From the most remote place on earth I call out to you in my despair. Lead me up to an inaccessible rocky summit!
PSA 61:3 Indeed, you are my shelter, a strong tower that protects me from the enemy.
PSA 61:4 I will be a permanent guest in your home; I will find shelter in the protection of your wings. (Selah)
PSA 61:5 For you, O God, hear my vows; you grant me the reward that belongs to your loyal followers.
PSA 61:6 Give the king long life! Make his lifetime span several generations!
PSA 61:7 May he reign forever before God! Decree that your loyal love and faithfulness should protect him.
PSA 61:8 Then I will sing praises to your name continually, as I fulfill my vows day after day.
PSA 62:1 For the music director, Jeduthun; a psalm of David. For God alone I patiently wait; he is the one who delivers me.
PSA 62:2 He alone is my protector and deliverer. He is my refuge; I will not be upended.
PSA 62:3 How long will you threaten a man? All of you are murderers, as dangerous as a leaning wall or an unstable fence.
PSA 62:4 They spend all their time planning how to bring him down. They love to use deceit; they pronounce blessings with their mouths, but inwardly they utter curses. (Selah)
PSA 62:5 Patiently wait for God alone, my soul! For he is the one who gives me confidence.
PSA 62:6 He alone is my protector and deliverer. He is my refuge; I will not be upended.
PSA 62:7 God delivers me and exalts me; God is my strong protector and my shelter.
PSA 62:8 Trust in him at all times, you people! Pour out your hearts before him! God is our shelter! (Selah)
PSA 62:9 Men are nothing but a mere breath; human beings are unreliable. When they are weighed in the scales, all of them together are lighter than air.
PSA 62:10 Do not trust in what you can gain by oppression! Do not put false confidence in what you can gain by robbery! If wealth increases, do not become attached to it!
PSA 62:11 God has declared one principle; two principles I have heard: God is strong,
PSA 62:12 and you, O Lord, demonstrate loyal love. For you repay men for what they do.
PSA 63:1 A psalm of David, written when he was in the Judean wilderness. O God, you are my God! I long for you! My soul thirsts for you, my flesh yearns for you, in a dry and parched land where there is no water.
PSA 63:2 Yes, in the sanctuary I have seen you, and witnessed your power and splendor.
PSA 63:3 Because experiencing your loyal love is better than life itself, my lips will praise you.
PSA 63:4 For this reason I will praise you while I live; in your name I will lift up my hands.
PSA 63:5 As if with choice meat you satisfy my soul. My mouth joyfully praises you,
PSA 63:6 whenever I remember you on my bed, and think about you during the nighttime hours.
PSA 63:7 For you are my deliverer; under your wings I rejoice.
PSA 63:8 My soul pursues you; your right hand upholds me.
PSA 63:9 Enemies seek to destroy my life, but they will descend into the depths of the earth.
PSA 63:10 Each one will be handed over to the sword; their corpses will be eaten by jackals.
PSA 63:11 But the king will rejoice in God; everyone who takes oaths in his name will boast, for the mouths of those who speak lies will be shut up.
PSA 64:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. Listen to me, O God, as I offer my lament! Protect my life from the enemy’s terrifying attacks.
PSA 64:2 Hide me from the plots of evil men, from the crowd of evildoers.
PSA 64:3 They sharpen their tongues like a sword; they aim their arrow, a slanderous charge,
PSA 64:4 in order to shoot down the innocent in secluded places. They shoot at him suddenly and are unafraid of retaliation.
PSA 64:5 They encourage one another to carry out their evil deed. They plan how to hide snares, and boast, “Who will see them?”
PSA 64:6 They devise unjust schemes; they disguise a well-conceived plot. Man’s inner thoughts cannot be discovered.
PSA 64:7 But God will shoot at them; suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.
PSA 64:8 Their slander will bring about their demise. All who see them will shudder,
PSA 64:9 and all people will fear. They will proclaim what God has done, and reflect on his deeds.
PSA 64:10 The godly will rejoice in the Lord and take shelter in him. All the morally upright will boast.
PSA 65:1 For the music director; a psalm of David, a song. Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion. Vows made to you are fulfilled.
PSA 65:2 You hear prayers; all people approach you.
PSA 65:3 Our record of sins overwhelms me, but you forgive our acts of rebellion.
PSA 65:4 How blessed is the one whom you choose, and allow to live in your palace courts. May we be satisfied with the good things of your house – your holy palace.
PSA 65:5 You answer our prayers by performing awesome acts of deliverance, O God, our savior. All the ends of the earth trust in you, as well as those living across the wide seas.
PSA 65:6 You created the mountains by your power, and demonstrated your strength.
PSA 65:7 You calm the raging seas and their roaring waves, as well as the commotion made by the nations.
PSA 65:8 Even those living in the most remote areas are awestruck by your acts; you cause those living in the east and west to praise you.
PSA 65:9 You visit the earth and give it rain; you make it rich and fertile with overflowing streams full of water. You provide grain for them, for you prepare the earth to yield its crops.
PSA 65:10 You saturate its furrows, and soak its plowed ground. With rain showers you soften its soil, and make its crops grow.
PSA 65:11 You crown the year with your good blessings, and you leave abundance in your wake.
PSA 65:12 The pastures in the wilderness glisten with moisture, and the hills are clothed with joy.
PSA 65:13 The meadows are clothed with sheep, and the valleys are covered with grain. They shout joyfully, yes, they sing.
PSA 66:1 For the music director; a song, a psalm. Shout out praise to God, all the earth!
PSA 66:2 Sing praises about the majesty of his reputation! Give him the honor he deserves!
PSA 66:3 Say to God: “How awesome are your deeds! Because of your great power your enemies cower in fear before you.
PSA 66:4 All the earth worships you and sings praises to you! They sing praises to your name!” (Selah)
PSA 66:5 Come and witness God’s exploits! His acts on behalf of people are awesome!
PSA 66:6 He turned the sea into dry land; they passed through the river on foot. Let us rejoice in him there!
PSA 66:7 He rules by his power forever; he watches the nations. Stubborn rebels should not exalt themselves. (Selah)
PSA 66:8 Praise our God, you nations! Loudly proclaim his praise!
PSA 66:9 He preserves our lives and does not allow our feet to slip.
PSA 66:10 For you, O God, tested us; you purified us like refined silver.
PSA 66:11 You led us into a trap; you caused us to suffer.
PSA 66:12 You allowed men to ride over our heads; we passed through fire and water, but you brought us out into a wide open place.
PSA 66:13 I will enter your temple with burnt sacrifices; I will fulfill the vows I made to you,
PSA 66:14 which my lips uttered and my mouth spoke when I was in trouble.
PSA 66:15 I will offer up to you fattened animals as burnt sacrifices, along with the smell of sacrificial rams. I will offer cattle and goats. (Selah)
PSA 66:16 Come! Listen, all you who are loyal to God! I will declare what he has done for me.
PSA 66:17 I cried out to him for help and praised him with my tongue.
PSA 66:18 If I had harbored sin in my heart, the Lord would not have listened.
PSA 66:19 However, God heard; he listened to my prayer.
PSA 66:20 God deserves praise, for he did not reject my prayer or abandon his love for me!
PSA 67:1 For the music director; to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a psalm, a song. May God show us his favor and bless us! May he smile on us! (Selah)
PSA 67:2 Then those living on earth will know what you are like; all nations will know how you deliver your people.
PSA 67:3 Let the nations thank you, O God! Let all the nations thank you!
PSA 67:4 Let foreigners rejoice and celebrate! For you execute justice among the nations, and govern the people living on earth. (Selah)
PSA 67:5 Let the nations thank you, O God! Let all the nations thank you!
PSA 67:6 The earth yields its crops. May God, our God, bless us!
PSA 67:7 May God bless us! Then all the ends of the earth will give him the honor he deserves.
PSA 68:1 For the music director; by David, a psalm, a song. God springs into action! His enemies scatter; his adversaries run from him.
PSA 68:2 As smoke is driven away by the wind, so you drive them away. As wax melts before fire, so the wicked are destroyed before God.
PSA 68:3 But the godly are happy; they rejoice before God and are overcome with joy.
PSA 68:4 Sing to God! Sing praises to his name! Exalt the one who rides on the clouds! For the Lord is his name! Rejoice before him!
PSA 68:5 He is a father to the fatherless and an advocate for widows. God rules from his holy palace.
PSA 68:6 God settles those who have been deserted in their own homes; he frees prisoners and grants them prosperity. But sinful rebels live in the desert.
PSA 68:7 O God, when you lead your people into battle, when you march through the desert, (Selah)
PSA 68:8 the earth shakes, yes, the heavens pour down rain before God, the God of Sinai, before God, the God of Israel.
PSA 68:9 O God, you cause abundant showers to fall on your chosen people. When they are tired, you sustain them,
PSA 68:10 for you live among them. You sustain the oppressed with your good blessings, O God.
PSA 68:11 The Lord speaks; many, many women spread the good news.
PSA 68:12 Kings leading armies run away – they run away! The lovely lady of the house divides up the loot.
PSA 68:13 When you lie down among the sheepfolds, the wings of the dove are covered with silver and with glittering gold.
PSA 68:14 When the sovereign judge scatters kings, let it snow on Zalmon!
PSA 68:15 The mountain of Bashan is a towering mountain; the mountain of Bashan is a mountain with many peaks.
PSA 68:16 Why do you look with envy, O mountains with many peaks, at the mountain where God has decided to live? Indeed the Lord will live there permanently!
PSA 68:17 God has countless chariots; they number in the thousands. The Lord comes from Sinai in holy splendor.
PSA 68:18 You ascend on high, you have taken many captives. You receive tribute from men, including even sinful rebels. Indeed the Lord God lives there!
PSA 68:19 The Lord deserves praise! Day after day he carries our burden, the God who delivers us. (Selah)
PSA 68:20 Our God is a God who delivers; the Lord, the sovereign Lord, can rescue from death.
PSA 68:21 Indeed God strikes the heads of his enemies, the hairy foreheads of those who persist in rebellion.
PSA 68:22 The Lord says, “I will retrieve them from Bashan, I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,
PSA 68:23 so that your feet may stomp in their blood, and your dogs may eat their portion of the enemies’ corpses.”
PSA 68:24 They see your processions, O God – the processions of my God, my king, who marches along in holy splendor.
PSA 68:25 Singers walk in front; musicians follow playing their stringed instruments, in the midst of young women playing tambourines.
PSA 68:26 In your large assemblies praise God, the Lord, in the assemblies of Israel!
PSA 68:27 There is little Benjamin, their ruler, and the princes of Judah in their robes, along with the princes of Zebulun and the princes of Naphtali.
PSA 68:28 God has decreed that you will be powerful. O God, you who have acted on our behalf, demonstrate your power,
PSA 68:29 as you come out of your temple in Jerusalem! Kings bring tribute to you.
PSA 68:30 Sound your battle cry against the wild beast of the reeds, and the nations that assemble like a herd of calves led by bulls! They humble themselves and offer gold and silver as tribute. God scatters the nations that like to do battle.
PSA 68:31 They come with red cloth from Egypt, Ethiopia voluntarily offers tribute to God.
PSA 68:32 O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God! Sing praises to the Lord, (Selah)
PSA 68:33 to the one who rides through the sky from ancient times! Look! He thunders loudly.
PSA 68:34 Acknowledge God’s power, his sovereignty over Israel, and the power he reveals in the skies!
PSA 68:35 You are awe-inspiring, O God, as you emerge from your holy temple! It is the God of Israel who gives the people power and strength. God deserves praise!
PSA 69:1 For the music director; according to the tune of “Lilies;” by David. Deliver me, O God, for the water has reached my neck.
PSA 69:2 I sink into the deep mire where there is no solid ground; I am in deep water, and the current overpowers me.
PSA 69:3 I am exhausted from shouting for help; my throat is sore; my eyes grow tired of looking for my God.
PSA 69:4 Those who hate me without cause are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who want to destroy me, my enemies for no reason, outnumber me. They make me repay what I did not steal!
PSA 69:5 O God, you are aware of my foolish sins; my guilt is not hidden from you.
PSA 69:6 Let none who rely on you be disgraced because of me, O sovereign Lord and king! Let none who seek you be ashamed because of me, O God of Israel!
PSA 69:7 For I suffer humiliation for your sake and am thoroughly disgraced.
PSA 69:8 My own brothers treat me like a stranger; they act as if I were a foreigner.
PSA 69:9 Certainly zeal for your house consumes me; I endure the insults of those who insult you.
PSA 69:10 I weep and refrain from eating food, which causes others to insult me.
PSA 69:11 I wear sackcloth and they ridicule me.
PSA 69:12 Those who sit at the city gate gossip about me; drunkards mock me in their songs.
PSA 69:13 O Lord, may you hear my prayer and be favorably disposed to me! O God, because of your great loyal love, answer me with your faithful deliverance!
PSA 69:14 Rescue me from the mud! Don’t let me sink! Deliver me from those who hate me, from the deep water!
PSA 69:15 Don’t let the current overpower me! Don’t let the deep swallow me up! Don’t let the pit devour me!
PSA 69:16 Answer me, O Lord, for your loyal love is good! Because of your great compassion, turn toward me!
PSA 69:17 Do not ignore your servant, for I am in trouble! Answer me right away!
PSA 69:18 Come near me and redeem me! Because of my enemies, rescue me!
PSA 69:19 You know how I am insulted, humiliated and disgraced; you can see all my enemies.
PSA 69:20 Their insults are painful and make me lose heart; I look for sympathy, but receive none, for comforters, but find none.
PSA 69:21 They put bitter poison into my food, and to quench my thirst they give me vinegar to drink.
PSA 69:22 May their dining table become a trap before them! May it be a snare for that group of friends!
PSA 69:23 May their eyes be blinded! Make them shake violently!
PSA 69:24 Pour out your judgment on them! May your raging anger overtake them!
PSA 69:25 May their camp become desolate, their tents uninhabited!
PSA 69:26 For they harass the one whom you discipline; they spread the news about the suffering of those whom you punish.
PSA 69:27 Hold them accountable for all their sins! Do not vindicate them!
PSA 69:28 May their names be deleted from the scroll of the living! Do not let their names be listed with the godly!
PSA 69:29 I am oppressed and suffering! O God, deliver and protect me!
PSA 69:30 I will sing praises to God’s name! I will magnify him as I give him thanks!
PSA 69:31 That will please the Lord more than an ox or a bull with horns and hooves.
PSA 69:32 The oppressed look on – let them rejoice! You who seek God, may you be encouraged!
PSA 69:33 For the Lord listens to the needy; he does not despise his captive people.
PSA 69:34 Let the heavens and the earth praise him, along with the seas and everything that swims in them!
PSA 69:35 For God will deliver Zion and rebuild the cities of Judah, and his people will again live in them and possess Zion.
PSA 69:36 The descendants of his servants will inherit it, and those who are loyal to him will live in it.
PSA 70:1 For the music director; by David; written to get God’s attention. O God, please be willing to rescue me! O Lord, hurry and help me!
PSA 70:2 May those who are trying to take my life be embarrassed and ashamed! May those who want to harm me be turned back and ashamed!
PSA 70:3 May those who say, “Aha! Aha!” be driven back and disgraced!
PSA 70:4 May all those who seek you be happy and rejoice in you! May those who love to experience your deliverance say continually, “May God be praised!”
PSA 70:5 I am oppressed and needy! O God, hurry to me! You are my helper and my deliverer! O Lord, do not delay!
PSA 71:1 In you, O Lord, I have taken shelter! Never let me be humiliated!
PSA 71:2 Vindicate me by rescuing me! Listen to me! Deliver me!
PSA 71:3 Be my protector and refuge, a stronghold where I can be safe! For you are my high ridge and my stronghold.
PSA 71:4 My God, rescue me from the power of the wicked, from the hand of the cruel oppressor!
PSA 71:5 For you give me confidence, O Lord; O Lord, I have trusted in you since I was young.
PSA 71:6 I have leaned on you since birth; you pulled me from my mother’s womb. I praise you continually.
PSA 71:7 Many are appalled when they see me, but you are my secure shelter.
PSA 71:8 I praise you constantly and speak of your splendor all day long.
PSA 71:9 Do not reject me in my old age! When my strength fails, do not abandon me!
PSA 71:10 For my enemies talk about me; those waiting for a chance to kill me plot my demise.
PSA 71:11 They say, “God has abandoned him. Run and seize him, for there is no one who will rescue him!”
PSA 71:12 O God, do not remain far away from me! My God, hurry and help me!
PSA 71:13 May my accusers be humiliated and defeated! May those who want to harm me be covered with scorn and disgrace!
PSA 71:14 As for me, I will wait continually, and will continue to praise you.
PSA 71:15 I will tell about your justice, and all day long proclaim your salvation, though I cannot fathom its full extent.
PSA 71:16 I will come and tell about the mighty acts of the sovereign Lord. I will proclaim your justice – yours alone.
PSA 71:17 O God, you have taught me since I was young, and I am still declaring your amazing deeds.
PSA 71:18 Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me, until I tell the next generation about your strength, and those coming after me about your power.
PSA 71:19 Your justice, O God, extends to the skies above; you have done great things. O God, who can compare to you?
PSA 71:20 Though you have allowed me to experience much trouble and distress, revive me once again! Bring me up once again from the depths of the earth!
PSA 71:21 Raise me to a position of great honor! Turn and comfort me!
PSA 71:22 I will express my thanks to you with a stringed instrument, praising your faithfulness, O my God! I will sing praises to you accompanied by a harp, O Holy One of Israel!
PSA 71:23 My lips will shout for joy! Yes, I will sing your praises! I will praise you when you rescue me!
PSA 71:24 All day long my tongue will also tell about your justice, for those who want to harm me will be embarrassed and ashamed.
PSA 72:1 For Solomon. O God, grant the king the ability to make just decisions! Grant the king’s son the ability to make fair decisions!
PSA 72:2 Then he will judge your people fairly, and your oppressed ones equitably.
PSA 72:3 The mountains will bring news of peace to the people, and the hills will announce justice.
PSA 72:4 He will defend the oppressed among the people; he will deliver the children of the poor and crush the oppressor.
PSA 72:5 People will fear you as long as the sun and moon remain in the sky, for generation after generation.
PSA 72:6 He will descend like rain on the mown grass, like showers that drench the earth.
PSA 72:7 During his days the godly will flourish; peace will prevail as long as the moon remains in the sky.
PSA 72:8 May he rule from sea to sea, and from the Euphrates River to the ends of the earth!
PSA 72:9 Before him the coastlands will bow down, and his enemies will lick the dust.
PSA 72:10 The kings of Tarshish and the coastlands will offer gifts; the kings of Sheba and Seba will bring tribute.
PSA 72:11 All kings will bow down to him; all nations will serve him.
PSA 72:12 For he will rescue the needy when they cry out for help, and the oppressed who have no defender.
PSA 72:13 He will take pity on the poor and needy; the lives of the needy he will save.
PSA 72:14 From harm and violence he will defend them; he will value their lives.
PSA 72:15 May he live! May they offer him gold from Sheba! May they continually pray for him! May they pronounce blessings on him all day long!
PSA 72:16 May there be an abundance of grain in the earth; on the tops of the mountains may it sway! May its fruit trees flourish like the forests of Lebanon! May its crops be as abundant as the grass of the earth!
PSA 72:17 May his fame endure! May his dynasty last as long as the sun remains in the sky! May they use his name when they formulate their blessings! May all nations consider him to be favored by God!
PSA 72:18 The Lord God, the God of Israel, deserves praise! He alone accomplishes amazing things!
PSA 72:19 His glorious name deserves praise forevermore! May his majestic splendor fill the whole earth! We agree! We agree!
PSA 72:20 This collection of the prayers of David son of Jesse ends here.
PSA 73:1 A psalm by Asaph. Certainly God is good to Israel, and to those whose motives are pure!
PSA 73:2 But as for me, my feet almost slipped; my feet almost slid out from under me.
PSA 73:3 For I envied those who are proud, as I observed the prosperity of the wicked.
PSA 73:4 For they suffer no pain; their bodies are strong and well-fed.
PSA 73:5 They are immune to the trouble common to men; they do not suffer as other men do.
PSA 73:6 Arrogance is their necklace, and violence their clothing.
PSA 73:7 Their prosperity causes them to do wrong; their thoughts are sinful.
PSA 73:8 They mock and say evil things; they proudly threaten violence.
PSA 73:9 They speak as if they rule in heaven, and lay claim to the earth.
PSA 73:10 Therefore they have more than enough food to eat, and even suck up the water of the sea.
PSA 73:11 They say, “How does God know what we do? Is the sovereign one aware of what goes on?”
PSA 73:12 Take a good look! This is what the wicked are like, those who always have it so easy and get richer and richer.
PSA 73:13 I concluded, “Surely in vain I have kept my motives pure and maintained a pure lifestyle.
PSA 73:14 I suffer all day long, and am punished every morning.”
PSA 73:15 If I had publicized these thoughts, I would have betrayed your loyal followers.
PSA 73:16 When I tried to make sense of this, it was troubling to me.
PSA 73:17 Then I entered the precincts of God’s temple, and understood the destiny of the wicked.
PSA 73:18 Surely you put them in slippery places; you bring them down to ruin.
PSA 73:19 How desolate they become in a mere moment! Terrifying judgments make their demise complete!
PSA 73:20 They are like a dream after one wakes up. O Lord, when you awake you will despise them.
PSA 73:21 Yes, my spirit was bitter, and my insides felt sharp pain.
PSA 73:22 I was ignorant and lacked insight; I was as senseless as an animal before you.
PSA 73:23 But I am continually with you; you hold my right hand.
PSA 73:24 You guide me by your wise advice, and then you will lead me to a position of honor.
PSA 73:25 Whom do I have in heaven but you? I desire no one but you on earth.
PSA 73:26 My flesh and my heart may grow weak, but God always protects my heart and gives me stability.
PSA 73:27 Yes, look! Those far from you die; you destroy everyone who is unfaithful to you.
PSA 73:28 But as for me, God’s presence is all I need. I have made the sovereign Lord my shelter, as I declare all the things you have done.
PSA 74:1 A well-written song by Asaph. Why, O God, have you permanently rejected us? Why does your anger burn against the sheep of your pasture?
PSA 74:2 Remember your people whom you acquired in ancient times, whom you rescued so they could be your very own nation, as well as Mount Zion, where you dwell!
PSA 74:3 Hurry and look at the permanent ruins, and all the damage the enemy has done to the temple!
PSA 74:4 Your enemies roar in the middle of your sanctuary; they set up their battle flags.
PSA 74:5 They invade like lumberjacks swinging their axes in a thick forest.
PSA 74:6 And now they are tearing down all its engravings with axes and crowbars.
PSA 74:7 They set your sanctuary on fire; they desecrate your dwelling place by knocking it to the ground.
PSA 74:8 They say to themselves, “We will oppress all of them.” They burn down all the places where people worship God in the land.
PSA 74:9 We do not see any signs of God’s presence; there are no longer any prophets and we have no one to tell us how long this will last.
PSA 74:10 How long, O God, will the adversary hurl insults? Will the enemy blaspheme your name forever?
PSA 74:11 Why do you remain inactive? Intervene and destroy him!
PSA 74:12 But God has been my king from ancient times, performing acts of deliverance on the earth.
PSA 74:13 You destroyed the sea by your strength; you shattered the heads of the sea monster in the water.
PSA 74:14 You crushed the heads of Leviathan; you fed him to the people who live along the coast.
PSA 74:15 You broke open the spring and the stream; you dried up perpetually flowing rivers.
PSA 74:16 You established the cycle of day and night; you put the moon and sun in place.
PSA 74:17 You set up all the boundaries of the earth; you created the cycle of summer and winter.
PSA 74:18 Remember how the enemy hurls insults, O Lord, and how a foolish nation blasphemes your name!
PSA 74:19 Do not hand the life of your dove over to a wild animal! Do not continue to disregard the lives of your oppressed people!
PSA 74:20 Remember your covenant promises, for the dark regions of the earth are full of places where violence rules.
PSA 74:21 Do not let the afflicted be turned back in shame! Let the oppressed and poor praise your name!
PSA 74:22 Rise up, O God! Defend your honor! Remember how fools insult you all day long!
PSA 74:23 Do not disregard what your enemies say, or the unceasing shouts of those who defy you.
PSA 75:1 For the music director; according to the al-tashcheth style; a psalm of Asaph; a song. We give thanks to you, O God! We give thanks! You reveal your presence; people tell about your amazing deeds.
PSA 75:2 God says, “At the appointed times, I judge fairly.
PSA 75:3 When the earth and all its inhabitants dissolve in fear, I make its pillars secure.” (Selah)
PSA 75:4 I say to the proud, “Do not be proud,” and to the wicked, “Do not be so confident of victory!
PSA 75:5 Do not be so certain you have won! Do not speak with your head held so high!
PSA 75:6 For victory does not come from the east or west, or from the wilderness.
PSA 75:7 For God is the judge! He brings one down and exalts another.
PSA 75:8 For the Lord holds in his hand a cup full of foaming wine mixed with spices, and pours it out. Surely all the wicked of the earth will slurp it up and drink it to its very last drop.”
PSA 75:9 As for me, I will continually tell what you have done; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob!
PSA 75:10 God says, “I will bring down all the power of the wicked; the godly will be victorious.”
PSA 76:1 For the music director; to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a psalm of Asaph, a song. God has revealed himself in Judah; in Israel his reputation is great.
PSA 76:2 He lives in Salem; he dwells in Zion.
PSA 76:3 There he shattered the arrows, the shield, the sword, and the rest of the weapons of war. (Selah)
PSA 76:4 You shine brightly and reveal your majesty, as you descend from the hills where you killed your prey.
PSA 76:5 The bravehearted were plundered; they “fell asleep.” All the warriors were helpless.
PSA 76:6 At the sound of your battle cry, O God of Jacob, both rider and horse “fell asleep.”
PSA 76:7 You are awesome! Yes, you! Who can withstand your intense anger?
PSA 76:8 From heaven you announced what their punishment would be. The earth was afraid and silent
PSA 76:9 when God arose to execute judgment, and to deliver all the oppressed of the earth. (Selah)
PSA 76:10 Certainly your angry judgment upon men will bring you praise; you reveal your anger in full measure.
PSA 76:11 Make vows to the Lord your God and repay them! Let all those who surround him bring tribute to the awesome one!
PSA 76:12 He humbles princes; the kings of the earth regard him as awesome.
PSA 77:1 For the music director, Jeduthun; a psalm of Asaph. I will cry out to God and call for help! I will cry out to God and he will pay attention to me.
PSA 77:2 In my time of trouble I sought the Lord. I kept my hand raised in prayer throughout the night. I refused to be comforted.
PSA 77:3 I said, “I will remember God while I groan; I will think about him while my strength leaves me.” (Selah)
PSA 77:4 You held my eyelids open; I was troubled and could not speak.
PSA 77:5 I thought about the days of old, about ancient times.
PSA 77:6 I said, “During the night I will remember the song I once sang; I will think very carefully.” I tried to make sense of what was happening.
PSA 77:7 I asked, “Will the Lord reject me forever? Will he never again show me his favor?
PSA 77:8 Has his loyal love disappeared forever? Has his promise failed forever?
PSA 77:9 Has God forgotten to be merciful? Has his anger stifled his compassion?”
PSA 77:10 Then I said, “I am sickened by the thought that the sovereign One might become inactive.
PSA 77:11 I will remember the works of the Lord. Yes, I will remember the amazing things you did long ago!
PSA 77:12 I will think about all you have done; I will reflect upon your deeds!”
PSA 77:13 O God, your deeds are extraordinary! What god can compare to our great God?
PSA 77:14 You are the God who does amazing things; you have revealed your strength among the nations.
PSA 77:15 You delivered your people by your strength – the children of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah)
PSA 77:16 The waters saw you, O God, the waters saw you and trembled. Yes, the depths of the sea shook with fear.
PSA 77:17 The clouds poured down rain; the skies thundered. Yes, your arrows flashed about.
PSA 77:18 Your thunderous voice was heard in the wind; the lightning bolts lit up the world; the earth trembled and shook.
PSA 77:19 You walked through the sea; you passed through the surging waters, but left no footprints.
PSA 77:20 You led your people like a flock of sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
PSA 78:1 A well-written song by Asaph. Pay attention, my people, to my instruction! Listen to the words I speak!
PSA 78:2 I will sing a song that imparts wisdom; I will make insightful observations about the past.
PSA 78:3 What we have heard and learned – that which our ancestors have told us –
PSA 78:4 we will not hide from their descendants. We will tell the next generation about the Lord’s praiseworthy acts, about his strength and the amazing things he has done.
PSA 78:5 He established a rule in Jacob; he set up a law in Israel. He commanded our ancestors to make his deeds known to their descendants,
PSA 78:6 so that the next generation, children yet to be born, might know about them. They will grow up and tell their descendants about them.
PSA 78:7 Then they will place their confidence in God. They will not forget the works of God, and they will obey his commands.
PSA 78:8 Then they will not be like their ancestors, who were a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation that was not committed and faithful to God.
PSA 78:9 The Ephraimites were armed with bows, but they retreated in the day of battle.
PSA 78:10 They did not keep their covenant with God, and they refused to obey his law.
PSA 78:11 They forgot what he had done, the amazing things he had shown them.
PSA 78:12 He did amazing things in the sight of their ancestors, in the land of Egypt, in the region of Zoan.
PSA 78:13 He divided the sea and led them across it; he made the water stand in a heap.
PSA 78:14 He led them with a cloud by day, and with the light of a fire all night long.
PSA 78:15 He broke open rocks in the wilderness, and gave them enough water to fill the depths of the sea.
PSA 78:16 He caused streams to flow from the rock, and made the water flow like rivers.
PSA 78:17 Yet they continued to sin against him, and rebelled against the sovereign One in the desert.
PSA 78:18 They willfully challenged God by asking for food to satisfy their appetite.
PSA 78:19 They insulted God, saying, “Is God really able to give us food in the wilderness?
PSA 78:20 Yes, he struck a rock and water flowed out, streams gushed forth. But can he also give us food? Will he provide meat for his people?”
PSA 78:21 When the Lord heard this, he was furious. A fire broke out against Jacob, and his anger flared up against Israel,
PSA 78:22 because they did not have faith in God, and did not trust his ability to deliver them.
PSA 78:23 He gave a command to the clouds above, and opened the doors in the sky.
PSA 78:24 He rained down manna for them to eat; he gave them the grain of heaven.
PSA 78:25 Man ate the food of the mighty ones. He sent them more than enough to eat.
PSA 78:26 He brought the east wind through the sky, and by his strength led forth the south wind.
PSA 78:27 He rained down meat on them like dust, birds as numerous as the sand on the seashores.
PSA 78:28 He caused them to fall right in the middle of their camp, all around their homes.
PSA 78:29 They ate until they were stuffed; he gave them what they desired.
PSA 78:30 They were not yet filled up, their food was still in their mouths,
PSA 78:31 when the anger of God flared up against them. He killed some of the strongest of them; he brought the young men of Israel to their knees.
PSA 78:32 Despite all this, they continued to sin, and did not trust him to do amazing things.
PSA 78:33 So he caused them to die unsatisfied and filled with terror.
PSA 78:34 When he struck them down, they sought his favor; they turned back and longed for God.
PSA 78:35 They remembered that God was their protector, and that the sovereign God was their deliverer.
PSA 78:36 But they deceived him with their words, and lied to him.
PSA 78:37 They were not really committed to him, and they were unfaithful to his covenant.
PSA 78:38 Yet he is compassionate. He forgives sin and does not destroy. He often holds back his anger, and does not stir up his fury.
PSA 78:39 He remembered that they were made of flesh, and were like a wind that blows past and does not return.
PSA 78:40 How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness, and insulted him in the desert!
PSA 78:41 They again challenged God, and offended the Holy One of Israel.
PSA 78:42 They did not remember what he had done, how he delivered them from the enemy,
PSA 78:43 when he performed his awesome deeds in Egypt, and his acts of judgment in the region of Zoan.
PSA 78:44 He turned their rivers into blood, and they could not drink from their streams.
PSA 78:45 He sent swarms of biting insects against them, as well as frogs that overran their land.
PSA 78:46 He gave their crops to the grasshopper, the fruit of their labor to the locust.
PSA 78:47 He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycamore-fig trees with driving rain.
PSA 78:48 He rained hail down on their cattle, and hurled lightning bolts down on their livestock.
PSA 78:49 His raging anger lashed out against them, He sent fury, rage, and trouble as messengers who bring disaster.
PSA 78:50 He sent his anger in full force; he did not spare them from death; he handed their lives over to destruction.
PSA 78:51 He struck down all the firstborn in Egypt, the firstfruits of their reproductive power in the tents of Ham.
PSA 78:52 Yet he brought out his people like sheep; he led them through the wilderness like a flock.
PSA 78:53 He guided them safely along, while the sea covered their enemies.
PSA 78:54 He brought them to the border of his holy land, to this mountainous land which his right hand acquired.
PSA 78:55 He drove the nations out from before them; he assigned them their tribal allotments and allowed the tribes of Israel to settle down.
PSA 78:56 Yet they challenged and defied the sovereign God, and did not obey his commands.
PSA 78:57 They were unfaithful and acted as treacherously as their ancestors; they were as unreliable as a malfunctioning bow.
PSA 78:58 They made him angry with their pagan shrines, and made him jealous with their idols.
PSA 78:59 God heard and was angry; he completely rejected Israel.
PSA 78:60 He abandoned the sanctuary at Shiloh, the tent where he lived among men.
PSA 78:61 He allowed the symbol of his strong presence to be captured; he gave the symbol of his splendor into the hand of the enemy.
PSA 78:62 He delivered his people over to the sword, and was angry with his chosen nation.
PSA 78:63 Fire consumed their young men, and their virgins remained unmarried.
PSA 78:64 Their priests fell by the sword, but their widows did not weep.
PSA 78:65 But then the Lord awoke from his sleep; he was like a warrior in a drunken rage.
PSA 78:66 He drove his enemies back; he made them a permanent target for insults.
PSA 78:67 He rejected the tent of Joseph; he did not choose the tribe of Ephraim.
PSA 78:68 He chose the tribe of Judah, and Mount Zion, which he loves.
PSA 78:69 He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens above; as secure as the earth, which he established permanently.
PSA 78:70 He chose David, his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds.
PSA 78:71 He took him away from following the mother sheep, and made him the shepherd of Jacob, his people, and of Israel, his chosen nation.
PSA 78:72 David cared for them with pure motives; he led them with skill.
PSA 79:1 A psalm of Asaph. O God, foreigners have invaded your chosen land; they have polluted your holy temple and turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins.
PSA 79:2 They have given the corpses of your servants to the birds of the sky; the flesh of your loyal followers to the beasts of the earth.
PSA 79:3 They have made their blood flow like water all around Jerusalem, and there is no one to bury them.
PSA 79:4 We have become an object of disdain to our neighbors; those who live on our borders taunt and insult us.
PSA 79:5 How long will this go on, O Lord? Will you stay angry forever? How long will your rage burn like fire?
PSA 79:6 Pour out your anger on the nations that do not acknowledge you, on the kingdoms that do not pray to you!
PSA 79:7 For they have devoured Jacob and destroyed his home.
PSA 79:8 Do not hold us accountable for the sins of earlier generations! Quickly send your compassion our way, for we are in serious trouble!
PSA 79:9 Help us, O God, our deliverer! For the sake of your glorious reputation, rescue us! Forgive our sins for the sake of your reputation!
PSA 79:10 Why should the nations say, “Where is their God?” Before our very eyes may the shed blood of your servants be avenged among the nations!
PSA 79:11 Listen to the painful cries of the prisoners! Use your great strength to set free those condemned to die!
PSA 79:12 Pay back our neighbors in full! May they be insulted the same way they insulted you, O Lord!
PSA 79:13 Then we, your people, the sheep of your pasture, will continually thank you. We will tell coming generations of your praiseworthy acts.
PSA 80:1 For the music director; according to the shushan-eduth style; a psalm of Asaph. O shepherd of Israel, pay attention, you who lead Joseph like a flock of sheep! You who sit enthroned above the winged angels, reveal your splendor!
PSA 80:2 In the sight of Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh reveal your power! Come and deliver us!
PSA 80:3 O God, restore us! Smile on us! Then we will be delivered!
PSA 80:4 O Lord God, invincible warrior! How long will you remain angry at your people while they pray to you?
PSA 80:5 You have given them tears as food; you have made them drink tears by the measure.
PSA 80:6 You have made our neighbors dislike us, and our enemies insult us.
PSA 80:7 O God, invincible warrior, restore us! Smile on us! Then we will be delivered!
PSA 80:8 You uprooted a vine from Egypt; you drove out nations and transplanted it.
PSA 80:9 You cleared the ground for it; it took root, and filled the land.
PSA 80:10 The mountains were covered by its shadow, the highest cedars by its branches.
PSA 80:11 Its branches reached the Mediterranean Sea, and its shoots the Euphrates River.
PSA 80:12 Why did you break down its walls, so that all who pass by pluck its fruit?
PSA 80:13 The wild boars of the forest ruin it; the insects of the field feed on it.
PSA 80:14 O God, invincible warrior, come back! Look down from heaven and take notice! Take care of this vine,
PSA 80:15 the root your right hand planted, the shoot you made to grow!
PSA 80:16 It is burned and cut down. They die because you are displeased with them.
PSA 80:17 May you give support to the one you have chosen, to the one whom you raised up for yourself!
PSA 80:18 Then we will not turn away from you. Revive us and we will pray to you!
PSA 80:19 O Lord God, invincible warrior, restore us! Smile on us! Then we will be delivered!
PSA 81:1 For the music director; according to the gittith style; by Asaph. Shout for joy to God, our source of strength! Shout out to the God of Jacob!
PSA 81:2 Sing a song and play the tambourine, the pleasant sounding harp, and the ten-stringed instrument!
PSA 81:3 Sound the ram’s horn on the day of the new moon, and on the day of the full moon when our festival begins.
PSA 81:4 For observing the festival is a requirement for Israel; it is an ordinance given by the God of Jacob.
PSA 81:5 He decreed it as a regulation in Joseph, when he attacked the land of Egypt. I heard a voice I did not recognize.
PSA 81:6 It said: “I removed the burden from his shoulder; his hands were released from holding the basket.
PSA 81:7 In your distress you called out and I rescued you. I answered you from a dark thundercloud. I tested you at the waters of Meribah. (Selah)
PSA 81:8 I said, ‘Listen, my people! I will warn you! O Israel, if only you would obey me!
PSA 81:9 There must be no other god among you. You must not worship a foreign god.
PSA 81:10 I am the Lord, your God, the one who brought you out of the land of Egypt. Open your mouth wide and I will fill it!’
PSA 81:11 But my people did not obey me; Israel did not submit to me.
PSA 81:12 I gave them over to their stubborn desires; they did what seemed right to them.
PSA 81:13 If only my people would obey me! If only Israel would keep my commands!
PSA 81:14 Then I would quickly subdue their enemies, and attack their adversaries.”
PSA 81:15 (May those who hate the Lord cower in fear before him! May they be permanently humiliated!)
PSA 81:16 “I would feed Israel the best wheat, and would satisfy your appetite with honey from the rocky cliffs.”
PSA 82:1 A psalm of Asaph. God stands in the assembly of El; in the midst of the gods he renders judgment.
PSA 82:2 He says, “How long will you make unjust legal decisions and show favoritism to the wicked? (Selah)
PSA 82:3 Defend the cause of the poor and the fatherless! Vindicate the oppressed and suffering!
PSA 82:4 Rescue the poor and needy! Deliver them from the power of the wicked!
PSA 82:5 They neither know nor understand. They stumble around in the dark, while all the foundations of the earth crumble.
PSA 82:6 I thought, ‘You are gods; all of you are sons of the Most High.’
PSA 82:7 Yet you will die like mortals; you will fall like all the other rulers.”
PSA 82:8 Rise up, O God, and execute judgment on the earth! For you own all the nations.
PSA 83:1 A song, a psalm of Asaph. O God, do not be silent! Do not ignore us! Do not be inactive, O God!
PSA 83:2 For look, your enemies are making a commotion; those who hate you are hostile.
PSA 83:3 They carefully plot against your people, and make plans to harm the ones you cherish.
PSA 83:4 They say, “Come on, let’s annihilate them so they are no longer a nation! Then the name of Israel will be remembered no more.”
PSA 83:5 Yes, they devise a unified strategy; they form an alliance against you.
PSA 83:6 It includes the tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites, Moab and the Hagrites,
PSA 83:7 Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek, Philistia and the inhabitants of Tyre.
PSA 83:8 Even Assyria has allied with them, lending its strength to the descendants of Lot. (Selah)
PSA 83:9 Do to them as you did to Midian – as you did to Sisera and Jabin at the Kishon River!
PSA 83:10 They were destroyed at Endor; their corpses were like manure on the ground.
PSA 83:11 Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna,
PSA 83:12 who said, “Let’s take over the pastures of God!”
PSA 83:13 O my God, make them like dead thistles, like dead weeds blown away by the wind!
PSA 83:14 Like the fire that burns down the forest, or the flames that consume the mountainsides,
PSA 83:15 chase them with your gale winds, and terrify them with your windstorm.
PSA 83:16 Cover their faces with shame, so they might seek you, O Lord.
PSA 83:17 May they be humiliated and continually terrified! May they die in shame!
PSA 83:18 Then they will know that you alone are the Lord, the sovereign king over all the earth.
PSA 84:1 For the music director; according to the gittith style; written by the Korahites, a psalm. How lovely is the place where you live, O Lord who rules over all!
PSA 84:2 I desperately want to be in the courts of the Lord’s temple. My heart and my entire being shout for joy to the living God.
PSA 84:3 Even the birds find a home there, and the swallow builds a nest, where she can protect her young near your altars, O Lord who rules over all, my king and my God.
PSA 84:4 How blessed are those who live in your temple and praise you continually! (Selah)
PSA 84:5 How blessed are those who find their strength in you, and long to travel the roads that lead to your temple!
PSA 84:6 As they pass through the Baca Valley, he provides a spring for them. The rain even covers it with pools of water.
PSA 84:7 They are sustained as they travel along; each one appears before God in Zion.
PSA 84:8 O Lord, sovereign God, hear my prayer! Listen, O God of Jacob! (Selah)
PSA 84:9 O God, take notice of our shield! Show concern for your chosen king!
PSA 84:10 Certainly spending just one day in your temple courts is better than spending a thousand elsewhere. I would rather stand at the entrance to the temple of my God than live in the tents of the wicked.
PSA 84:11 For the Lord God is our sovereign protector. The Lord bestows favor and honor; he withholds no good thing from those who have integrity.
PSA 84:12 O Lord who rules over all, how blessed are those who trust in you!
PSA 85:1 For the music director; written by the Korahites, a psalm. O Lord, you showed favor to your land; you restored the well-being of Jacob.
PSA 85:2 You pardoned the wrongdoing of your people; you forgave all their sin. (Selah)
PSA 85:3 You withdrew all your fury; you turned back from your raging anger.
PSA 85:4 Restore us, O God our deliverer! Do not be displeased with us!
PSA 85:5 Will you stay mad at us forever? Will you remain angry throughout future generations?
PSA 85:6 Will you not revive us once more? Then your people will rejoice in you!
PSA 85:7 O Lord, show us your loyal love! Bestow on us your deliverance!
PSA 85:8 I will listen to what God the Lord says. For he will make peace with his people, his faithful followers. Yet they must not return to their foolish ways.
PSA 85:9 Certainly his loyal followers will soon experience his deliverance; then his splendor will again appear in our land.
PSA 85:10 Loyal love and faithfulness meet; deliverance and peace greet each other with a kiss.
PSA 85:11 Faithfulness grows from the ground, and deliverance looks down from the sky.
PSA 85:12 Yes, the Lord will bestow his good blessings, and our land will yield its crops.
PSA 85:13 Deliverance goes before him, and prepares a pathway for him.
PSA 86:1 A prayer of David. Listen O Lord! Answer me! For I am oppressed and needy.
PSA 86:2 Protect me, for I am loyal! O my God, deliver your servant, who trusts in you!
PSA 86:3 Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I cry out to you all day long!
PSA 86:4 Make your servant glad, for to you, O Lord, I pray!
PSA 86:5 Certainly O Lord, you are kind and forgiving, and show great faithfulness to all who cry out to you.
PSA 86:6 O Lord, hear my prayer! Pay attention to my plea for mercy!
PSA 86:7 In my time of trouble I cry out to you, for you will answer me.
PSA 86:8 None can compare to you among the gods, O Lord! Your exploits are incomparable!
PSA 86:9 All the nations, whom you created, will come and worship you, O Lord. They will honor your name.
PSA 86:10 For you are great and do amazing things. You alone are God.
PSA 86:11 O Lord, teach me how you want me to live! Then I will obey your commands. Make me wholeheartedly committed to you!
PSA 86:12 O Lord, my God, I will give you thanks with my whole heart! I will honor your name continually!
PSA 86:13 For you will extend your great loyal love to me, and will deliver my life from the depths of Sheol.
PSA 86:14 O God, arrogant men attack me; a gang of ruthless men, who do not respect you, seek my life.
PSA 86:15 But you, O Lord, are a compassionate and merciful God. You are patient and demonstrate great loyal love and faithfulness.
PSA 86:16 Turn toward me and have mercy on me! Give your servant your strength! Deliver your slave!
PSA 86:17 Show me evidence of your favor! Then those who hate me will see it and be ashamed, for you, O Lord, will help me and comfort me.
PSA 87:1 Written by the Korahites; a psalm, a song. The Lord’s city is in the holy hills.
PSA 87:2 The Lord loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwelling places of Jacob.
PSA 87:3 People say wonderful things about you, O city of God. (Selah)
PSA 87:4 I mention Rahab and Babylon to my followers. Here are Philistia and Tyre, along with Ethiopia. It is said of them, “This one was born there.”
PSA 87:5 But it is said of Zion’s residents, “Each one of these was born in her, and the sovereign One makes her secure.”
PSA 87:6 The Lord writes in the census book of the nations, “This one was born there.” (Selah)
PSA 87:7 As for the singers, as well as the pipers – all of them sing within your walls.
PSA 88:1 A song, a psalm written by the Korahites; for the music director; according to the machalath-leannoth style; a well-written song by Heman the Ezrachite. O Lord God who delivers me! By day I cry out and at night I pray before you.
PSA 88:2 Listen to my prayer! Pay attention to my cry for help!
PSA 88:3 For my life is filled with troubles and I am ready to enter Sheol.
PSA 88:4 They treat me like those who descend into the grave. I am like a helpless man,
PSA 88:5 adrift among the dead, like corpses lying in the grave, whom you remember no more, and who are cut off from your power.
PSA 88:6 You place me in the lowest regions of the pit, in the dark places, in the watery depths.
PSA 88:7 Your anger bears down on me, and you overwhelm me with all your waves. (Selah)
PSA 88:8 You cause those who know me to keep their distance; you make me an appalling sight to them. I am trapped and cannot get free.
PSA 88:9 My eyes grow weak because of oppression. I call out to you, O Lord, all day long; I spread out my hands in prayer to you.
PSA 88:10 Do you accomplish amazing things for the dead? Do the departed spirits rise up and give you thanks? (Selah)
PSA 88:11 Is your loyal love proclaimed in the grave, or your faithfulness in the place of the dead?
PSA 88:12 Are your amazing deeds experienced in the dark region, or your deliverance in the land of oblivion?
PSA 88:13 As for me, I cry out to you, O Lord; in the morning my prayer confronts you.
PSA 88:14 O Lord, why do you reject me, and pay no attention to me?
PSA 88:15 I am oppressed and have been on the verge of death since my youth. I have been subjected to your horrors and am numb with pain.
PSA 88:16 Your anger overwhelms me; your terrors destroy me.
PSA 88:17 They surround me like water all day long; they join forces and encircle me.
PSA 88:18 You cause my friends and neighbors to keep their distance; those who know me leave me alone in the darkness.
PSA 89:1 A well-written song by Ethan the Ezrachite. I will sing continually about the Lord’s faithful deeds; to future generations I will proclaim your faithfulness.
PSA 89:2 For I say, “Loyal love is permanently established; in the skies you set up your faithfulness.”
PSA 89:3 The Lord said, “I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have made a promise on oath to David, my servant:
PSA 89:4 ‘I will give you an eternal dynasty and establish your throne throughout future generations.’” (Selah)
PSA 89:5 O Lord, the heavens praise your amazing deeds, as well as your faithfulness in the angelic assembly.
PSA 89:6 For who in the skies can compare to the Lord? Who is like the Lord among the heavenly beings,
PSA 89:7 a God who is honored in the great angelic assembly, and more awesome than all who surround him?
PSA 89:8 O Lord, sovereign God! Who is strong like you, O Lord? Your faithfulness surrounds you.
PSA 89:9 You rule over the proud sea. When its waves surge, you calm them.
PSA 89:10 You crushed the Proud One and killed it; with your strong arm you scattered your enemies.
PSA 89:11 The heavens belong to you, as does the earth. You made the world and all it contains.
PSA 89:12 You created the north and the south. Tabor and Hermon rejoice in your name.
PSA 89:13 Your arm is powerful, your hand strong, your right hand victorious.
PSA 89:14 Equity and justice are the foundation of your throne. Loyal love and faithfulness characterize your rule.
PSA 89:15 How blessed are the people who worship you! O Lord, they experience your favor.
PSA 89:16 They rejoice in your name all day long, and are vindicated by your justice.
PSA 89:17 For you give them splendor and strength. By your favor we are victorious.
PSA 89:18 For our shield belongs to the Lord, our king to the Holy One of Israel.
PSA 89:19 Then you spoke through a vision to your faithful followers and said: “I have energized a warrior; I have raised up a young man from the people.
PSA 89:20 I have discovered David, my servant. With my holy oil I have anointed him as king.
PSA 89:21 My hand will support him, and my arm will strengthen him.
PSA 89:22 No enemy will be able to exact tribute from him; a violent oppressor will not be able to humiliate him.
PSA 89:23 I will crush his enemies before him; I will strike down those who hate him.
PSA 89:24 He will experience my faithfulness and loyal love, and by my name he will win victories.
PSA 89:25 I will place his hand over the sea, his right hand over the rivers.
PSA 89:26 He will call out to me, ‘You are my father, my God, and the protector who delivers me.’
PSA 89:27 I will appoint him to be my firstborn son, the most exalted of the earth’s kings.
PSA 89:28 I will always extend my loyal love to him, and my covenant with him is secure.
PSA 89:29 I will give him an eternal dynasty, and make his throne as enduring as the skies above.
PSA 89:30 If his sons reject my law and disobey my regulations,
PSA 89:31 if they break my rules and do not keep my commandments,
PSA 89:32 I will punish their rebellion by beating them with a club, their sin by inflicting them with bruises.
PSA 89:33 But I will not remove my loyal love from him, nor be unfaithful to my promise.
PSA 89:34 I will not break my covenant or go back on what I promised.
PSA 89:35 Once and for all I have vowed by my own holiness, I will never deceive David.
PSA 89:36 His dynasty will last forever. His throne will endure before me, like the sun,
PSA 89:37 it will remain stable, like the moon, his throne will endure like the skies.” (Selah)
PSA 89:38 But you have spurned and rejected him; you are angry with your chosen king.
PSA 89:39 You have repudiated your covenant with your servant; you have thrown his crown to the ground.
PSA 89:40 You have broken down all his walls; you have made his strongholds a heap of ruins.
PSA 89:41 All who pass by have robbed him; he has become an object of disdain to his neighbors.
PSA 89:42 You have allowed his adversaries to be victorious, and all his enemies to rejoice.
PSA 89:43 You turn back his sword from the adversary, and have not sustained him in battle.
PSA 89:44 You have brought to an end his splendor, and have knocked his throne to the ground.
PSA 89:45 You have cut short his youth, and have covered him with shame. (Selah)
PSA 89:46 How long, O Lord, will this last? Will you remain hidden forever? Will your anger continue to burn like fire?
PSA 89:47 Take note of my brief lifespan! Why do you make all people so mortal?
PSA 89:48 No man can live on without experiencing death, or deliver his life from the power of Sheol. (Selah)
PSA 89:49 Where are your earlier faithful deeds, O Lord, the ones performed in accordance with your reliable oath to David?
PSA 89:50 Take note, O Lord, of the way your servants are taunted, and of how I must bear so many insults from people!
PSA 89:51 Your enemies, O Lord, hurl insults; they insult your chosen king as they dog his footsteps.
PSA 89:52 The Lord deserves praise forevermore! We agree! We agree!
PSA 90:1 A prayer of Moses, the man of God. O Lord, you have been our protector through all generations!
PSA 90:2 Even before the mountains came into existence, or you brought the world into being, you were the eternal God.
PSA 90:3 You make mankind return to the dust, and say, “Return, O people!”
PSA 90:4 Yes, in your eyes a thousand years are like yesterday that quickly passes, or like one of the divisions of the nighttime.
PSA 90:5 You bring their lives to an end and they “fall asleep.” In the morning they are like the grass that sprouts up;
PSA 90:6 in the morning it glistens and sprouts up; at evening time it withers and dries up.
PSA 90:7 Yes, we are consumed by your anger; we are terrified by your wrath.
PSA 90:8 You are aware of our sins; you even know about our hidden sins.
PSA 90:9 Yes, throughout all our days we experience your raging fury; the years of our lives pass quickly, like a sigh.
PSA 90:10 The days of our lives add up to seventy years, or eighty, if one is especially strong. But even one’s best years are marred by trouble and oppression. Yes, they pass quickly and we fly away.
PSA 90:11 Who can really fathom the intensity of your anger? Your raging fury causes people to fear you.
PSA 90:12 So teach us to consider our mortality, so that we might live wisely.
PSA 90:13 Turn back toward us, O Lord! How long must this suffering last? Have pity on your servants!
PSA 90:14 Satisfy us in the morning with your loyal love! Then we will shout for joy and be happy all our days!
PSA 90:15 Make us happy in proportion to the days you have afflicted us, in proportion to the years we have experienced trouble!
PSA 90:16 May your servants see your work! May their sons see your majesty!
PSA 90:17 May our sovereign God extend his favor to us! Make our endeavors successful! Yes, make them successful!
PSA 91:1 As for you, the one who lives in the shelter of the sovereign One, and resides in the protective shadow of the mighty king –
PSA 91:2 I say this about the Lord, my shelter and my stronghold, my God in whom I trust –
PSA 91:3 he will certainly rescue you from the snare of the hunter and from the destructive plague.
PSA 91:4 He will shelter you with his wings; you will find safety under his wings. His faithfulness is like a shield or a protective wall.
PSA 91:5 You need not fear the terrors of the night, the arrow that flies by day,
PSA 91:6 the plague that comes in the darkness, or the disease that comes at noon.
PSA 91:7 Though a thousand may fall beside you, and a multitude on your right side, it will not reach you.
PSA 91:8 Certainly you will see it with your very own eyes – you will see the wicked paid back.
PSA 91:9 For you have taken refuge in the Lord, my shelter, the sovereign One.
PSA 91:10 No harm will overtake you; no illness will come near your home.
PSA 91:11 For he will order his angels to protect you in all you do.
PSA 91:12 They will lift you up in their hands, so you will not slip and fall on a stone.
PSA 91:13 You will subdue a lion and a snake; you will trample underfoot a young lion and a serpent.
PSA 91:14 The Lord says, “Because he is devoted to me, I will deliver him; I will protect him because he is loyal to me.
PSA 91:15 When he calls out to me, I will answer him. I will be with him when he is in trouble; I will rescue him and bring him honor.
PSA 91:16 I will satisfy him with long life, and will let him see my salvation.
PSA 92:1 A psalm; a song for the Sabbath day. It is fitting to thank the Lord, and to sing praises to your name, O sovereign One!
PSA 92:2 It is fitting to proclaim your loyal love in the morning, and your faithfulness during the night,
PSA 92:3 to the accompaniment of a ten-stringed instrument and a lyre, to the accompaniment of the meditative tone of the harp.
PSA 92:4 For you, O Lord, have made me happy by your work. I will sing for joy because of what you have done.
PSA 92:5 How great are your works, O Lord! Your plans are very intricate!
PSA 92:6 The spiritually insensitive do not recognize this; the fool does not understand this.
PSA 92:7 When the wicked sprout up like grass, and all the evildoers glisten, it is so that they may be annihilated.
PSA 92:8 But you, O Lord, reign forever!
PSA 92:9 Indeed, look at your enemies, O Lord! Indeed, look at how your enemies perish! All the evildoers are scattered!
PSA 92:10 You exalt my horn like that of a wild ox. I am covered with fresh oil.
PSA 92:11 I gloat in triumph over those who tried to ambush me; I hear the defeated cries of the evil foes who attacked me.
PSA 92:12 The godly grow like a palm tree; they grow high like a cedar in Lebanon.
PSA 92:13 Planted in the Lord’s house, they grow in the courts of our God.
PSA 92:14 They bear fruit even when they are old; they are filled with vitality and have many leaves.
PSA 92:15 So they proclaim that the Lord, my protector, is just and never unfair.
PSA 93:1 The Lord reigns! He is robed in majesty, the Lord is robed, he wears strength around his waist. Indeed, the world is established, it cannot be moved.
PSA 93:2 Your throne has been secure from ancient times; you have always been king.
PSA 93:3 The waves roar, O Lord, the waves roar, the waves roar and crash.
PSA 93:4 Above the sound of the surging water, and the mighty waves of the sea, the Lord sits enthroned in majesty.
PSA 93:5 The rules you set down are completely reliable. Holiness aptly adorns your house, O Lord, forever.
PSA 94:1 O Lord, the God who avenges! O God who avenges, reveal your splendor!
PSA 94:2 Rise up, O judge of the earth! Pay back the proud!
PSA 94:3 O Lord, how long will the wicked, how long will the wicked celebrate?
PSA 94:4 They spew out threats and speak defiantly; all the evildoers boast.
PSA 94:5 O Lord, they crush your people; they oppress the nation that belongs to you.
PSA 94:6 They kill the widow and the one residing outside his native land, and they murder the fatherless.
PSA 94:7 Then they say, “The Lord does not see this; the God of Jacob does not take notice of it.”
PSA 94:8 Take notice of this, you ignorant people! You fools, when will you ever understand?
PSA 94:9 Does the one who makes the human ear not hear? Does the one who forms the human eye not see?
PSA 94:10 Does the one who disciplines the nations not punish? He is the one who imparts knowledge to human beings!
PSA 94:11 The Lord knows that peoples’ thoughts are morally bankrupt.
PSA 94:12 How blessed is the one whom you instruct, O Lord, the one whom you teach from your law,
PSA 94:13 in order to protect him from times of trouble, until the wicked are destroyed.
PSA 94:14 Certainly the Lord does not forsake his people; he does not abandon the nation that belongs to him.
PSA 94:15 For justice will prevail, and all the morally upright will be vindicated.
PSA 94:16 Who will rise up to defend me against the wicked? Who will stand up for me against the evildoers?
PSA 94:17 If the Lord had not helped me, I would have laid down in the silence of death.
PSA 94:18 If I say, “My foot is slipping,” your loyal love, O Lord, supports me.
PSA 94:19 When worries threaten to overwhelm me, your soothing touch makes me happy.
PSA 94:20 Cruel rulers are not your allies, those who make oppressive laws.
PSA 94:21 They conspire against the blameless, and condemn to death the innocent.
PSA 94:22 But the Lord will protect me, and my God will shelter me.
PSA 94:23 He will pay them back for their sin. He will destroy them because of their evil; the Lord our God will destroy them.
PSA 95:1 Come! Let’s sing for joy to the Lord! Let’s shout out praises to our protector who delivers us!
PSA 95:2 Let’s enter his presence with thanksgiving! Let’s shout out to him in celebration!
PSA 95:3 For the Lord is a great God, a great king who is superior to all gods.
PSA 95:4 The depths of the earth are in his hand, and the mountain peaks belong to him.
PSA 95:5 The sea is his, for he made it. His hands formed the dry land.
PSA 95:6 Come! Let’s bow down and worship! Let’s kneel before the Lord, our creator!
PSA 95:7 For he is our God; we are the people of his pasture, the sheep he owns. Today, if only you would obey him!
PSA 95:8 He says, “Do not be stubborn like they were at Meribah, like they were that day at Massah in the wilderness,
PSA 95:9 where your ancestors challenged my authority, and tried my patience, even though they had seen my work.
PSA 95:10 For forty years I was continually disgusted with that generation, and I said, ‘These people desire to go astray; they do not obey my commands.’
PSA 95:11 So I made a vow in my anger, ‘They will never enter into the resting place I had set aside for them.’”
PSA 96:1 Sing to the Lord a new song! Sing to the Lord, all the earth!
PSA 96:2 Sing to the Lord! Praise his name! Announce every day how he delivers!
PSA 96:3 Tell the nations about his splendor! Tell all the nations about his amazing deeds!
PSA 96:4 For the Lord is great and certainly worthy of praise; he is more awesome than all gods.
PSA 96:5 For all the gods of the nations are worthless, but the Lord made the sky.
PSA 96:6 Majestic splendor emanates from him; his sanctuary is firmly established and beautiful.
PSA 96:7 Ascribe to the Lord, O families of the nations, ascribe to the Lord splendor and strength!
PSA 96:8 Ascribe to the Lord the splendor he deserves! Bring an offering and enter his courts!
PSA 96:9 Worship the Lord in holy attire! Tremble before him, all the earth!
PSA 96:10 Say among the nations, “The Lord reigns! The world is established, it cannot be moved. He judges the nations fairly.”
PSA 96:11 Let the sky rejoice, and the earth be happy! Let the sea and everything in it shout!
PSA 96:12 Let the fields and everything in them celebrate! Then let the trees of the forest shout with joy
PSA 96:13 before the Lord, for he comes! For he comes to judge the earth! He judges the world fairly, and the nations in accordance with his justice.
PSA 97:1 The Lord reigns! Let the earth be happy! Let the many coastlands rejoice!
PSA 97:2 Dark clouds surround him; equity and justice are the foundation of his throne.
PSA 97:3 Fire goes before him; on every side it burns up his enemies.
PSA 97:4 His lightning bolts light up the world; the earth sees and trembles.
PSA 97:5 The mountains melt like wax before the Lord, before the Lord of the whole earth.
PSA 97:6 The sky declares his justice, and all the nations see his splendor.
PSA 97:7 All who worship idols are ashamed, those who boast about worthless idols. All the gods bow down before him.
PSA 97:8 Zion hears and rejoices, the towns of Judah are happy, because of your judgments, O Lord.
PSA 97:9 For you, O Lord, are the sovereign king over the whole earth; you are elevated high above all gods.
PSA 97:10 You who love the Lord, hate evil! He protects the lives of his faithful followers; he delivers them from the power of the wicked.
PSA 97:11 The godly bask in the light; the morally upright experience joy.
PSA 97:12 You godly ones, rejoice in the Lord! Give thanks to his holy name.
PSA 98:1 A psalm. Sing to the Lord a new song, for he performs amazing deeds! His right hand and his mighty arm accomplish deliverance.
PSA 98:2 The Lord demonstrates his power to deliver; in the sight of the nations he reveals his justice.
PSA 98:3 He remains loyal and faithful to the family of Israel. All the ends of the earth see our God deliver us.
PSA 98:4 Shout out praises to the Lord, all the earth! Break out in a joyful shout and sing!
PSA 98:5 Sing to the Lord accompanied by a harp, accompanied by a harp and the sound of music!
PSA 98:6 With trumpets and the blaring of the ram’s horn, shout out praises before the king, the Lord!
PSA 98:7 Let the sea and everything in it shout, along with the world and those who live in it!
PSA 98:8 Let the rivers clap their hands! Let the mountains sing in unison
PSA 98:9 before the Lord! For he comes to judge the earth! He judges the world fairly, and the nations in a just manner.
PSA 99:1 The Lord reigns! The nations tremble. He sits enthroned above the winged angels; the earth shakes.
PSA 99:2 The Lord is elevated in Zion; he is exalted over all the nations.
PSA 99:3 Let them praise your great and awesome name! He is holy!
PSA 99:4 The king is strong; he loves justice. You ensure that legal decisions will be made fairly; you promote justice and equity in Jacob.
PSA 99:5 Praise the Lord our God! Worship before his footstool! He is holy!
PSA 99:6 Moses and Aaron were among his priests; Samuel was one of those who prayed to him. They prayed to the Lord and he answered them.
PSA 99:7 He spoke to them from a pillar of cloud; they obeyed his regulations and the ordinance he gave them.
PSA 99:8 O Lord our God, you answered them. They found you to be a forgiving God, but also one who punished their sinful deeds.
PSA 99:9 Praise the Lord our God! Worship on his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy!
PSA 100:1 A thanksgiving psalm. Shout out praises to the Lord, all the earth!
PSA 100:2 Worship the Lord with joy! Enter his presence with joyful singing!
PSA 100:3 Acknowledge that the Lord is God! He made us and we belong to him; we are his people, the sheep of his pasture.
PSA 100:4 Enter his gates with thanksgiving, and his courts with praise! Give him thanks! Praise his name!
PSA 100:5 For the Lord is good. His loyal love endures, and he is faithful through all generations.
PSA 101:1 A psalm of David. I will sing about loyalty and justice! To you, O Lord, I will sing praises!
PSA 101:2 I will walk in the way of integrity. When will you come to me? I will conduct my business with integrity in the midst of my palace.
PSA 101:3 I will not even consider doing what is dishonest. I hate doing evil; I will have no part of it.
PSA 101:4 I will have nothing to do with a perverse person; I will not permit evil.
PSA 101:5 I will destroy anyone who slanders his neighbor in secret. I will not tolerate anyone who has a cocky demeanor and an arrogant attitude.
PSA 101:6 I will favor the honest people of the land, and allow them to live with me. Those who walk in the way of integrity will attend me.
PSA 101:7 Deceitful people will not live in my palace. Liars will not be welcome in my presence.
PSA 101:8 Each morning I will destroy all the wicked people in the land, and remove all evildoers from the city of the Lord.
PSA 102:1 The prayer of an oppressed man, as he grows faint and pours out his lament before the Lord. O Lord, hear my prayer! Pay attention to my cry for help!
PSA 102:2 Do not ignore me in my time of trouble! Listen to me! When I call out to you, quickly answer me!
PSA 102:3 For my days go up in smoke, and my bones are charred like a fireplace.
PSA 102:4 My heart is parched and withered like grass, for I am unable to eat food.
PSA 102:5 Because of the anxiety that makes me groan, my bones protrude from my skin.
PSA 102:6 I am like an owl in the wilderness; I am like a screech owl among the ruins.
PSA 102:7 I stay awake; I am like a solitary bird on a roof.
PSA 102:8 All day long my enemies taunt me; those who mock me use my name in their curses.
PSA 102:9 For I eat ashes as if they were bread, and mix my drink with my tears,
PSA 102:10 because of your anger and raging fury. Indeed, you pick me up and throw me away.
PSA 102:11 My days are coming to an end, and I am withered like grass.
PSA 102:12 But you, O Lord, rule forever, and your reputation endures.
PSA 102:13 You will rise up and have compassion on Zion. For it is time to have mercy on her, for the appointed time has come.
PSA 102:14 Indeed, your servants take delight in her stones, and feel compassion for the dust of her ruins.
PSA 102:15 The nations will respect the reputation of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth will respect his splendor,
PSA 102:16 when the Lord rebuilds Zion, and reveals his splendor,
PSA 102:17 when he responds to the prayer of the destitute, and does not reject their request.
PSA 102:18 The account of his intervention will be recorded for future generations; people yet to be born will praise the Lord.
PSA 102:19 For he will look down from his sanctuary above; from heaven the Lord will look toward earth,
PSA 102:20 in order to hear the painful cries of the prisoners, and to set free those condemned to die,
PSA 102:21 so they may proclaim the name of the Lord in Zion, and praise him in Jerusalem,
PSA 102:22 when the nations gather together, and the kingdoms pay tribute to the Lord.
PSA 102:23 He has taken away my strength in the middle of life; he has cut short my days.
PSA 102:24 I say, “O my God, please do not take me away in the middle of my life! You endure through all generations.
PSA 102:25 In earlier times you established the earth; the skies are your handiwork.
PSA 102:26 They will perish, but you will endure. They will wear out like a garment; like clothes you will remove them and they will disappear.
PSA 102:27 But you remain; your years do not come to an end.
PSA 102:28 The children of your servants will settle down here, and their descendants will live securely in your presence.”
PSA 103:1 By David. Praise the Lord, O my soul! With all that is within me, praise his holy name!
PSA 103:2 Praise the Lord, O my soul! Do not forget all his kind deeds!
PSA 103:3 He is the one who forgives all your sins, who heals all your diseases,
PSA 103:4 who delivers your life from the Pit, who crowns you with his loyal love and compassion,
PSA 103:5 who satisfies your life with good things, so your youth is renewed like an eagle’s.
PSA 103:6 The Lord does what is fair, and executes justice for all the oppressed.
PSA 103:7 The Lord revealed his faithful acts to Moses, his deeds to the Israelites.
PSA 103:8 The Lord is compassionate and merciful; he is patient and demonstrates great loyal love.
PSA 103:9 He does not always accuse, and does not stay angry.
PSA 103:10 He does not deal with us as our sins deserve; he does not repay us as our misdeeds deserve.
PSA 103:11 For as the skies are high above the earth, so his loyal love towers over his faithful followers.
PSA 103:12 As far as the eastern horizon is from the west, so he removes the guilt of our rebellious actions from us.
PSA 103:13 As a father has compassion on his children, so the Lord has compassion on his faithful followers.
PSA 103:14 For he knows what we are made of; he realizes we are made of clay.
PSA 103:15 A person’s life is like grass. Like a flower in the field it flourishes,
PSA 103:16 but when the hot wind blows by, it disappears, and one can no longer even spot the place where it once grew.
PSA 103:17 But the Lord continually shows loyal love to his faithful followers, and is faithful to their descendants,
PSA 103:18 to those who keep his covenant, who are careful to obey his commands.
PSA 103:19 The Lord has established his throne in heaven; his kingdom extends over everything.
PSA 103:20 Praise the Lord, you angels of his, you powerful warriors who carry out his decrees and obey his orders!
PSA 103:21 Praise the Lord, all you warriors of his, you servants of his who carry out his desires!
PSA 103:22 Praise the Lord, all that he has made, in all the regions of his kingdom! Praise the Lord, O my soul!
PSA 104:1 Praise the Lord, O my soul! O Lord my God, you are magnificent. You are robed in splendor and majesty.
PSA 104:2 He covers himself with light as if it were a garment. He stretches out the skies like a tent curtain,
PSA 104:3 and lays the beams of the upper rooms of his palace on the rain clouds. He makes the clouds his chariot, and travels along on the wings of the wind.
PSA 104:4 He makes the winds his messengers, and the flaming fire his attendant.
PSA 104:5 He established the earth on its foundations; it will never be upended.
PSA 104:6 The watery deep covered it like a garment; the waters reached above the mountains.
PSA 104:7 Your shout made the waters retreat; at the sound of your thunderous voice they hurried off –
PSA 104:8 as the mountains rose up, and the valleys went down – to the place you appointed for them.
PSA 104:9 You set up a boundary for them that they could not cross, so that they would not cover the earth again.
PSA 104:10 He turns springs into streams; they flow between the mountains.
PSA 104:11 They provide water for all the animals in the field; the wild donkeys quench their thirst.
PSA 104:12 The birds of the sky live beside them; they chirp among the bushes.
PSA 104:13 He waters the mountains from the upper rooms of his palace; the earth is full of the fruit you cause to grow.
PSA 104:14 He provides grass for the cattle, and crops for people to cultivate, so they can produce food from the ground,
PSA 104:15 as well as wine that makes people feel so good, and so they can have oil to make their faces shine, as well as food that sustains people’s lives.
PSA 104:16 The trees of the Lord receive all the rain they need, the cedars of Lebanon which he planted,
PSA 104:17 where the birds make nests, near the evergreens in which the herons live.
PSA 104:18 The wild goats live in the high mountains; the rock badgers find safety in the cliffs.
PSA 104:19 He made the moon to mark the months, and the sun sets according to a regular schedule.
PSA 104:20 You make it dark and night comes, during which all the beasts of the forest prowl around.
PSA 104:21 The lions roar for prey, seeking their food from God.
PSA 104:22 When the sun rises, they withdraw and sleep in their dens.
PSA 104:23 Men then go out to do their work, and labor away until evening.
PSA 104:24 How many living things you have made, O Lord! You have exhibited great skill in making all of them; the earth is full of the living things you have made.
PSA 104:25 Over here is the deep, wide sea, which teems with innumerable swimming creatures, living things both small and large.
PSA 104:26 The ships travel there, and over here swims the whale you made to play in it.
PSA 104:27 All of your creatures wait for you to provide them with food on a regular basis.
PSA 104:28 You give food to them and they receive it; you open your hand and they are filled with food.
PSA 104:29 When you ignore them, they panic. When you take away their life’s breath, they die and return to dust.
PSA 104:30 When you send your life-giving breath, they are created, and you replenish the surface of the ground.
PSA 104:31 May the splendor of the Lord endure! May the Lord find pleasure in the living things he has made!
PSA 104:32 He looks down on the earth and it shakes; he touches the mountains and they start to smolder.
PSA 104:33 I will sing to the Lord as long as I live; I will sing praise to my God as long as I exist!
PSA 104:34 May my thoughts be pleasing to him! I will rejoice in the Lord.
PSA 104:35 May sinners disappear from the earth, and the wicked vanish! Praise the Lord, O my soul! Praise the Lord!
PSA 105:1 Give thanks to the Lord! Call on his name! Make known his accomplishments among the nations!
PSA 105:2 Sing to him! Make music to him! Tell about all his miraculous deeds!
PSA 105:3 Boast about his holy name! Let the hearts of those who seek the Lord rejoice!
PSA 105:4 Seek the Lord and the strength he gives! Seek his presence continually!
PSA 105:5 Recall the miraculous deeds he performed, his mighty acts and the judgments he decreed,
PSA 105:6 O children of Abraham, God’s servant, you descendants of Jacob, God’s chosen ones!
PSA 105:7 He is the Lord our God; he carries out judgment throughout the earth.
PSA 105:8 He always remembers his covenantal decree, the promise he made to a thousand generations –
PSA 105:9 the promise he made to Abraham, the promise he made by oath to Isaac!
PSA 105:10 He gave it to Jacob as a decree, to Israel as a lasting promise,
PSA 105:11 saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan as the portion of your inheritance.”
PSA 105:12 When they were few in number, just a very few, and resident aliens within it,
PSA 105:13 they wandered from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another.
PSA 105:14 He let no one oppress them; he disciplined kings for their sake,
PSA 105:15 saying, “Don’t touch my chosen ones! Don’t harm my prophets!”
PSA 105:16 He called down a famine upon the earth; he cut off all the food supply.
PSA 105:17 He sent a man ahead of them – Joseph was sold as a servant.
PSA 105:18 The shackles hurt his feet; his neck was placed in an iron collar,
PSA 105:19 until the time when his prediction came true. The Lord’s word proved him right.
PSA 105:20 The king authorized his release; the ruler of nations set him free.
PSA 105:21 He put him in charge of his palace, and made him manager of all his property,
PSA 105:22 giving him authority to imprison his officials and to teach his advisers.
PSA 105:23 Israel moved to Egypt; Jacob lived for a time in the land of Ham.
PSA 105:24 The Lord made his people very fruitful, and made them more numerous than their enemies.
PSA 105:25 He caused them to hate his people, and to mistreat his servants.
PSA 105:26 He sent his servant Moses, and Aaron, whom he had chosen.
PSA 105:27 They executed his miraculous signs among them, and his amazing deeds in the land of Ham.
PSA 105:28 He made it dark; they did not disobey his orders.
PSA 105:29 He turned their water into blood, and killed their fish.
PSA 105:30 Their land was overrun by frogs, which even got into the rooms of their kings.
PSA 105:31 He ordered flies to come; gnats invaded their whole territory.
PSA 105:32 He sent hail along with the rain; there was lightning in their land.
PSA 105:33 He destroyed their vines and fig trees, and broke the trees throughout their territory.
PSA 105:34 He ordered locusts to come, innumerable grasshoppers.
PSA 105:35 They ate all the vegetation in their land, and devoured the crops of their fields.
PSA 105:36 He struck down all the firstborn in their land, the firstfruits of their reproductive power.
PSA 105:37 He brought his people out enriched with silver and gold; none of his tribes stumbled.
PSA 105:38 Egypt was happy when they left, for they were afraid of them.
PSA 105:39 He spread out a cloud for a cover, and provided a fire to light up the night.
PSA 105:40 They asked for food, and he sent quails; he satisfied them with food from the sky.
PSA 105:41 He opened up a rock and water flowed out; a river ran through dry regions.
PSA 105:42 Yes, he remembered the sacred promise he made to Abraham his servant.
PSA 105:43 When he led his people out, they rejoiced; his chosen ones shouted with joy.
PSA 105:44 He handed the territory of nations over to them, and they took possession of what other peoples had produced,
PSA 105:45 so that they might keep his commands and obey his laws. Praise the Lord!
PSA 106:1 Praise the Lord! Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, and his loyal love endures!
PSA 106:2 Who can adequately recount the Lord’s mighty acts, or relate all his praiseworthy deeds?
PSA 106:3 How blessed are those who promote justice, and do what is right all the time!
PSA 106:4 Remember me, O Lord, when you show favor to your people! Pay attention to me, when you deliver,
PSA 106:5 so I may see the prosperity of your chosen ones, rejoice along with your nation, and boast along with the people who belong to you.
PSA 106:6 We have sinned like our ancestors; we have done wrong, we have done evil.
PSA 106:7 Our ancestors in Egypt failed to appreciate your miraculous deeds, they failed to remember your many acts of loyal love, and they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.
PSA 106:8 Yet he delivered them for the sake of his reputation, that he might reveal his power.
PSA 106:9 He shouted at the Red Sea and it dried up; he led them through the deep water as if it were a desert.
PSA 106:10 He delivered them from the power of the one who hated them, and rescued them from the power of the enemy.
PSA 106:11 The water covered their enemies; not even one of them survived.
PSA 106:12 They believed his promises; they sang praises to him.
PSA 106:13 They quickly forgot what he had done; they did not wait for his instructions.
PSA 106:14 In the wilderness they had an insatiable craving for meat; they challenged God in the desert.
PSA 106:15 He granted their request, then struck them with a disease.
PSA 106:16 In the camp they resented Moses, and Aaron, the Lord’s holy priest.
PSA 106:17 The earth opened up and swallowed Dathan; it engulfed the group led by Abiram.
PSA 106:18 Fire burned their group; the flames scorched the wicked.
PSA 106:19 They made an image of a calf at Horeb, and worshiped a metal idol.
PSA 106:20 They traded their majestic God for the image of an ox that eats grass.
PSA 106:21 They rejected the God who delivered them, the one who performed great deeds in Egypt,
PSA 106:22 amazing feats in the land of Ham, mighty acts by the Red Sea.
PSA 106:23 He threatened to destroy them, but Moses, his chosen one, interceded with him and turned back his destructive anger.
PSA 106:24 They rejected the fruitful land; they did not believe his promise.
PSA 106:25 They grumbled in their tents; they did not obey the Lord.
PSA 106:26 So he made a solemn vow that he would make them die in the desert,
PSA 106:27 make their descendants die among the nations, and scatter them among foreign lands.
PSA 106:28 They worshiped Baal of Peor, and ate sacrifices offered to the dead.
PSA 106:29 They made the Lord angry by their actions, and a plague broke out among them.
PSA 106:30 Phinehas took a stand and intervened, and the plague subsided.
PSA 106:31 This brought him a reward, an eternal gift.
PSA 106:32 They made him angry by the waters of Meribah, and Moses suffered because of them,
PSA 106:33 for they aroused his temper, and he spoke rashly.
PSA 106:34 They did not destroy the nations, as the Lord had commanded them to do.
PSA 106:35 They mixed in with the nations and learned their ways.
PSA 106:36 They worshiped their idols, which became a snare to them.
PSA 106:37 They sacrificed their sons and daughters to demons.
PSA 106:38 They shed innocent blood – the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan. The land was polluted by bloodshed.
PSA 106:39 They were defiled by their deeds, and unfaithful in their actions.
PSA 106:40 So the Lord was angry with his people and despised the people who belong to him.
PSA 106:41 He handed them over to the nations, and those who hated them ruled over them.
PSA 106:42 Their enemies oppressed them; they were subject to their authority.
PSA 106:43 Many times he delivered them, but they had a rebellious attitude, and degraded themselves by their sin.
PSA 106:44 Yet he took notice of their distress, when he heard their cry for help.
PSA 106:45 He remembered his covenant with them, and relented because of his great loyal love.
PSA 106:46 He caused all their conquerors to have pity on them.
PSA 106:47 Deliver us, O Lord, our God! Gather us from among the nations! Then we will give thanks to your holy name, and boast about your praiseworthy deeds.
PSA 106:48 The Lord God of Israel deserves praise, in the future and forevermore. Let all the people say, “We agree! Praise the Lord!”
PSA 107:1 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, and his loyal love endures!
PSA 107:2 Let those delivered by the Lord speak out, those whom he delivered from the power of the enemy,
PSA 107:3 and gathered from foreign lands, from east and west, from north and south.
PSA 107:4 They wandered through the wilderness on a desert road; they found no city in which to live.
PSA 107:5 They were hungry and thirsty; they fainted from exhaustion.
PSA 107:6 They cried out to the Lord in their distress; he delivered them from their troubles.
PSA 107:7 He led them on a level road, that they might find a city in which to live.
PSA 107:8 Let them give thanks to the Lord for his loyal love, and for the amazing things he has done for people!
PSA 107:9 For he has satisfied those who thirst, and those who hunger he has filled with food.
PSA 107:10 They sat in utter darkness, bound in painful iron chains,
PSA 107:11 because they had rebelled against God’s commands, and rejected the instructions of the sovereign king.
PSA 107:12 So he used suffering to humble them; they stumbled and no one helped them up.
PSA 107:13 They cried out to the Lord in their distress; he delivered them from their troubles.
PSA 107:14 He brought them out of the utter darkness, and tore off their shackles.
PSA 107:15 Let them give thanks to the Lord for his loyal love, and for the amazing things he has done for people!
PSA 107:16 For he shattered the bronze gates, and hacked through the iron bars.
PSA 107:17 They acted like fools in their rebellious ways, and suffered because of their sins.
PSA 107:18 They lost their appetite for all food, and they drew near the gates of death.
PSA 107:19 They cried out to the Lord in their distress; he delivered them from their troubles.
PSA 107:20 He sent them an assuring word and healed them; he rescued them from the pits where they were trapped.
PSA 107:21 Let them give thanks to the Lord for his loyal love, and for the amazing things he has done for people!
PSA 107:22 Let them present thank offerings, and loudly proclaim what he has done!
PSA 107:23 Some traveled on the sea in ships, and carried cargo over the vast waters.
PSA 107:24 They witnessed the acts of the Lord, his amazing feats on the deep water.
PSA 107:25 He gave the order for a windstorm, and it stirred up the waves of the sea.
PSA 107:26 They reached up to the sky, then dropped into the depths. The sailors’ strength left them because the danger was so great.
PSA 107:27 They swayed and staggered like a drunk, and all their skill proved ineffective.
PSA 107:28 They cried out to the Lord in their distress; he delivered them from their troubles.
PSA 107:29 He calmed the storm, and the waves grew silent.
PSA 107:30 The sailors rejoiced because the waves grew quiet, and he led them to the harbor they desired.
PSA 107:31 Let them give thanks to the Lord for his loyal love, and for the amazing things he has done for people!
PSA 107:32 Let them exalt him in the assembly of the people! Let them praise him in the place where the leaders preside!
PSA 107:33 He turned streams into a desert, springs of water into arid land,
PSA 107:34 and a fruitful land into a barren place, because of the sin of its inhabitants.
PSA 107:35 As for his people, he turned a desert into a pool of water, and a dry land into springs of water.
PSA 107:36 He allowed the hungry to settle there, and they established a city in which to live.
PSA 107:37 They cultivated fields, and planted vineyards, which yielded a harvest of fruit.
PSA 107:38 He blessed them so that they became very numerous. He would not allow their cattle to decrease in number.
PSA 107:39 As for their enemies, they decreased in number and were beaten down, because of painful distress and suffering.
PSA 107:40 He would pour contempt upon princes, and he made them wander in a wasteland with no road.
PSA 107:41 Yet he protected the needy from oppression, and cared for his families like a flock of sheep.
PSA 107:42 When the godly see this, they rejoice, and every sinner shuts his mouth.
PSA 107:43 Whoever is wise, let him take note of these things! Let them consider the Lord’s acts of loyal love!
PSA 108:1 A song, a psalm of David. I am determined, O God! I will sing and praise you with my whole heart.
PSA 108:2 Awake, O stringed instrument and harp! I will wake up at dawn!
PSA 108:3 I will give you thanks before the nations, O Lord! I will sing praises to you before foreigners!
PSA 108:4 For your loyal love extends beyond the sky, and your faithfulness reaches the clouds.
PSA 108:5 Rise up above the sky, O God! May your splendor cover the whole earth!
PSA 108:6 Deliver by your power and answer me, so that the ones you love may be safe.
PSA 108:7 God has spoken in his sanctuary: “I will triumph! I will parcel out Shechem, the valley of Succoth I will measure off.
PSA 108:8 Gilead belongs to me, as does Manasseh! Ephraim is my helmet, Judah my royal scepter.
PSA 108:9 Moab is my wash basin. I will make Edom serve me. I will shout in triumph over Philistia.”
PSA 108:10 Who will lead me into the fortified city? Who will bring me to Edom?
PSA 108:11 Have you not rejected us, O God? O God, you do not go into battle with our armies.
PSA 108:12 Give us help against the enemy, for any help men might offer is futile.
PSA 108:13 By God’s power we will conquer; he will trample down our enemies.
PSA 109:1 For the music director, a psalm of David. O God whom I praise, do not ignore me!
PSA 109:2 For they say cruel and deceptive things to me; they lie to me.
PSA 109:3 They surround me and say hateful things; they attack me for no reason.
PSA 109:4 They repay my love with accusations, but I continue to pray.
PSA 109:5 They repay me evil for good, and hate for love.
PSA 109:6 Appoint an evil man to testify against him! May an accuser stand at his right side!
PSA 109:7 When he is judged, he will be found guilty! Then his prayer will be regarded as sinful.
PSA 109:8 May his days be few! May another take his job!
PSA 109:9 May his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow!
PSA 109:10 May his children roam around begging, asking for handouts as they leave their ruined home!
PSA 109:11 May the creditor seize all he owns! May strangers loot his property!
PSA 109:12 May no one show him kindness! May no one have compassion on his fatherless children!
PSA 109:13 May his descendants be cut off! May the memory of them be wiped out by the time the next generation arrives!
PSA 109:14 May his ancestors’ sins be remembered by the Lord! May his mother’s sin not be forgotten!
PSA 109:15 May the Lord be constantly aware of them, and cut off the memory of his children from the earth!
PSA 109:16 For he never bothered to show kindness; he harassed the oppressed and needy, and killed the disheartened.
PSA 109:17 He loved to curse others, so those curses have come upon him. He had no desire to bless anyone, so he has experienced no blessings.
PSA 109:18 He made cursing a way of life, so curses poured into his stomach like water and seeped into his bones like oil.
PSA 109:19 May a curse attach itself to him, like a garment one puts on, or a belt one wears continually!
PSA 109:20 May the Lord repay my accusers in this way, those who say evil things about me!
PSA 109:21 O sovereign Lord, intervene on my behalf for the sake of your reputation! Because your loyal love is good, deliver me!
PSA 109:22 For I am oppressed and needy, and my heart beats violently within me.
PSA 109:23 I am fading away like a shadow at the end of the day; I am shaken off like a locust.
PSA 109:24 I am so starved my knees shake; I have turned into skin and bones.
PSA 109:25 I am disdained by them. When they see me, they shake their heads.
PSA 109:26 Help me, O Lord my God! Because you are faithful to me, deliver me!
PSA 109:27 Then they will realize this is your work, and that you, Lord, have accomplished it.
PSA 109:28 They curse, but you will bless. When they attack, they will be humiliated, but your servant will rejoice.
PSA 109:29 My accusers will be covered with shame, and draped in humiliation as if it were a robe.
PSA 109:30 I will thank the Lord profusely, in the middle of a crowd I will praise him,
PSA 109:31 because he stands at the right hand of the needy, to deliver him from those who threaten his life.
PSA 110:1 A psalm of David. Here is the Lord’s proclamation to my lord: “Sit down at my right hand until I make your enemies your footstool!”
PSA 110:2 The Lord extends your dominion from Zion. Rule in the midst of your enemies!
PSA 110:3 Your people willingly follow you when you go into battle. On the holy hills at sunrise the dew of your youth belongs to you.
PSA 110:4 The Lord makes this promise on oath and will not revoke it: “You are an eternal priest after the pattern of Melchizedek.”
PSA 110:5 O sovereign Lord, at your right hand he strikes down kings in the day he unleashes his anger.
PSA 110:6 He executes judgment against the nations; he fills the valleys with corpses; he shatters their heads over the vast battlefield.
PSA 110:7 From the stream along the road he drinks; then he lifts up his head.
PSA 111:1 Praise the Lord! I will give thanks to the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly of the godly and the congregation.
PSA 111:2 The Lord’s deeds are great, eagerly awaited by all who desire them.
PSA 111:3 His work is majestic and glorious, and his faithfulness endures forever.
PSA 111:4 He does amazing things that will be remembered; the Lord is merciful and compassionate.
PSA 111:5 He gives food to his faithful followers; he always remembers his covenant.
PSA 111:6 He announced that he would do mighty deeds for his people, giving them a land that belonged to other nations.
PSA 111:7 His acts are characterized by faithfulness and justice; all his precepts are reliable.
PSA 111:8 They are forever firm, and should be faithfully and properly carried out.
PSA 111:9 He delivered his people; he ordained that his covenant be observed forever. His name is holy and awesome.
PSA 111:10 To obey the Lord is the fundamental principle for wise living; all who carry out his precepts acquire good moral insight. He will receive praise forever.
PSA 112:1 Praise the Lord! How blessed is the one who obeys the Lord, who takes great delight in keeping his commands.
PSA 112:2 His descendants will be powerful on the earth; the godly will be blessed.
PSA 112:3 His house contains wealth and riches; his integrity endures.
PSA 112:4 In the darkness a light shines for the godly, for each one who is merciful, compassionate, and just.
PSA 112:5 It goes well for the one who generously lends money, and conducts his business honestly.
PSA 112:6 For he will never be upended; others will always remember one who is just.
PSA 112:7 He does not fear bad news. He is confident; he trusts in the Lord.
PSA 112:8 His resolve is firm; he will not succumb to fear before he looks in triumph on his enemies.
PSA 112:9 He generously gives to the needy; his integrity endures. He will be vindicated and honored.
PSA 112:10 When the wicked see this, they will worry; they will grind their teeth in frustration and melt away; the desire of the wicked will perish.
PSA 113:1 Praise the Lord! Praise, you servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord!
PSA 113:2 May the Lord’s name be praised now and forevermore!
PSA 113:3 From east to west the Lord’s name is deserving of praise.
PSA 113:4 The Lord is exalted over all the nations; his splendor reaches beyond the sky.
PSA 113:5 Who can compare to the Lord our God, who sits on a high throne?
PSA 113:6 He bends down to look at the sky and the earth.
PSA 113:7 He raises the poor from the dirt, and lifts up the needy from the garbage pile,
PSA 113:8 that he might seat him with princes, with the princes of his people.
PSA 113:9 He makes the barren woman of the family a happy mother of children. Praise the Lord!
PSA 114:1 When Israel left Egypt, when the family of Jacob left a foreign nation behind,
PSA 114:2 Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his kingdom.
PSA 114:3 The sea looked and fled; the Jordan River turned back.
PSA 114:4 The mountains skipped like rams, the hills like lambs.
PSA 114:5 Why do you flee, O sea? Why do you turn back, O Jordan River?
PSA 114:6 Why do you skip like rams, O mountains, like lambs, O hills?
PSA 114:7 Tremble, O earth, before the Lord – before the God of Jacob,
PSA 114:8 who turned a rock into a pool of water, a hard rock into springs of water!
PSA 115:1 Not to us, O Lord, not to us! But to your name bring honor, for the sake of your loyal love and faithfulness.
PSA 115:2 Why should the nations say, “Where is their God?”
PSA 115:3 Our God is in heaven! He does whatever he pleases!
PSA 115:4 Their idols are made of silver and gold – they are man-made.
PSA 115:5 They have mouths, but cannot speak, eyes, but cannot see,
PSA 115:6 ears, but cannot hear, noses, but cannot smell,
PSA 115:7 hands, but cannot touch, feet, but cannot walk. They cannot even clear their throats.
PSA 115:8 Those who make them will end up like them, as will everyone who trusts in them.
PSA 115:9 O Israel, trust in the Lord! He is their deliverer and protector.
PSA 115:10 O family of Aaron, trust in the Lord! He is their deliverer and protector.
PSA 115:11 You loyal followers of the Lord, trust in the Lord! He is their deliverer and protector.
PSA 115:12 The Lord takes notice of us, he will bless – he will bless the family of Israel, he will bless the family of Aaron.
PSA 115:13 He will bless his loyal followers, both young and old.
PSA 115:14 May he increase your numbers, yours and your children’s!
PSA 115:15 May you be blessed by the Lord, the creator of heaven and earth!
PSA 115:16 The heavens belong to the Lord, but the earth he has given to mankind.
PSA 115:17 The dead do not praise the Lord, nor do any of those who descend into the silence of death.
PSA 115:18 But we will praise the Lord now and forevermore. Praise the Lord!
PSA 116:1 I love the Lord because he heard my plea for mercy,
PSA 116:2 and listened to me. As long as I live, I will call to him when I need help.
PSA 116:3 The ropes of death tightened around me, the snares of Sheol confronted me. I was confronted with trouble and sorrow.
PSA 116:4 I called on the name of the Lord, “Please Lord, rescue my life!”
PSA 116:5 The Lord is merciful and fair; our God is compassionate.
PSA 116:6 The Lord protects the untrained; I was in serious trouble and he delivered me.
PSA 116:7 Rest once more, my soul, for the Lord has vindicated you.
PSA 116:8 Yes, Lord, you rescued my life from death, and kept my feet from stumbling.
PSA 116:9 I will serve the Lord in the land of the living.
PSA 116:10 I had faith when I said, “I am severely oppressed.”
PSA 116:11 I rashly declared, “All men are liars.”
PSA 116:12 How can I repay the Lord for all his acts of kindness to me?
PSA 116:13 I will celebrate my deliverance, and call on the name of the Lord.
PSA 116:14 I will fulfill my vows to the Lord before all his people.
PSA 116:15 The Lord values the lives of his faithful followers.
PSA 116:16 Yes, Lord! I am indeed your servant; I am your lowest slave. You saved me from death.
PSA 116:17 I will present a thank offering to you, and call on the name of the Lord.
PSA 116:18 I will fulfill my vows to the Lord before all his people,
PSA 116:19 in the courts of the Lord’s temple, in your midst, O Jerusalem. Praise the Lord!
PSA 117:1 Praise the Lord, all you nations! Applaud him, all you foreigners!
PSA 117:2 For his loyal love towers over us, and the Lord’s faithfulness endures. Praise the Lord!
PSA 118:1 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good and his loyal love endures!
PSA 118:2 Let Israel say, “Yes, his loyal love endures!”
PSA 118:3 Let the family of Aaron say, “Yes, his loyal love endures!”
PSA 118:4 Let the loyal followers of the Lord say, “Yes, his loyal love endures!”
PSA 118:5 In my distress I cried out to the Lord. The Lord answered me and put me in a wide open place.
PSA 118:6 The Lord is on my side, I am not afraid! What can people do to me?
PSA 118:7 The Lord is on my side as my helper. I look in triumph on those who hate me.
PSA 118:8 It is better to take shelter in the Lord than to trust in people.
PSA 118:9 It is better to take shelter in the Lord than to trust in princes.
PSA 118:10 All the nations surrounded me. Indeed, in the name of the Lord I pushed them away.
PSA 118:11 They surrounded me, yes, they surrounded me. Indeed, in the name of the Lord I pushed them away.
PSA 118:12 They surrounded me like bees. But they disappeared as quickly as a fire among thorns. Indeed, in the name of the Lord I pushed them away.
PSA 118:13 “You aggressively attacked me and tried to knock me down, but the Lord helped me.
PSA 118:14 The Lord gives me strength and protects me; he has become my deliverer.”
PSA 118:15 They celebrate deliverance in the tents of the godly. The Lord’s right hand conquers,
PSA 118:16 the Lord’s right hand gives victory, the Lord’s right hand conquers.
PSA 118:17 I will not die, but live, and I will proclaim what the Lord has done.
PSA 118:18 The Lord severely punished me, but he did not hand me over to death.
PSA 118:19 Open for me the gates of the just king’s temple! I will enter through them and give thanks to the Lord.
PSA 118:20 This is the Lord’s gate – the godly enter through it.
PSA 118:21 I will give you thanks, for you answered me, and have become my deliverer.
PSA 118:22 The stone which the builders discarded has become the cornerstone.
PSA 118:23 This is the Lord’s work. We consider it amazing!
PSA 118:24 This is the day the Lord has brought about. We will be happy and rejoice in it.
PSA 118:25 Please Lord, deliver! Please Lord, grant us success!
PSA 118:26 May the one who comes in the name of the Lord be blessed! We will pronounce blessings on you in the Lord’s temple.
PSA 118:27 The Lord is God and he has delivered us. Tie the offering with ropes to the horns of the altar!
PSA 118:28 You are my God and I will give you thanks! You are my God and I will praise you!
PSA 118:29 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good and his loyal love endures!
PSA 119:1 How blessed are those whose actions are blameless, who obey the law of the Lord.
PSA 119:2 How blessed are those who observe his rules, and seek him with all their heart,
PSA 119:3 who, moreover, do no wrong, but follow in his footsteps.
PSA 119:4 You demand that your precepts be carefully kept.
PSA 119:5 If only I were predisposed to keep your statutes!
PSA 119:6 Then I would not be ashamed, if I were focused on all your commands.
PSA 119:7 I will give you sincere thanks, when I learn your just regulations.
PSA 119:8 I will keep your statutes. Do not completely abandon me!
PSA 119:9 How can a young person maintain a pure life? By guarding it according to your instructions!
PSA 119:10 With all my heart I seek you. Do not allow me to stray from your commands!
PSA 119:11 In my heart I store up your words, so I might not sin against you.
PSA 119:12 You deserve praise, O Lord! Teach me your statutes!
PSA 119:13 With my lips I proclaim all the regulations you have revealed.
PSA 119:14 I rejoice in the lifestyle prescribed by your rules as if they were riches of all kinds.
PSA 119:15 I will meditate on your precepts and focus on your behavior.
PSA 119:16 I find delight in your statutes; I do not forget your instructions.
PSA 119:17 Be kind to your servant! Then I will live and keep your instructions.
PSA 119:18 Open my eyes so I can truly see the marvelous things in your law!
PSA 119:19 I am like a foreigner in this land. Do not hide your commands from me!
PSA 119:20 I desperately long to know your regulations at all times.
PSA 119:21 You reprimand arrogant people. Those who stray from your commands are doomed.
PSA 119:22 Spare me shame and humiliation, for I observe your rules.
PSA 119:23 Though rulers plot and slander me, your servant meditates on your statutes.
PSA 119:24 Yes, I find delight in your rules; they give me guidance.
PSA 119:25 I collapse in the dirt. Revive me with your word!
PSA 119:26 I told you about my ways and you answered me. Teach me your statutes!
PSA 119:27 Help me to understand what your precepts mean! Then I can meditate on your marvelous teachings.
PSA 119:28 I collapse from grief. Sustain me by your word!
PSA 119:29 Remove me from the path of deceit! Graciously give me your law!
PSA 119:30 I choose the path of faithfulness; I am committed to your regulations.
PSA 119:31 I hold fast to your rules. O Lord, do not let me be ashamed!
PSA 119:32 I run along the path of your commands, for you enable me to do so.
PSA 119:33 Teach me, O Lord, the lifestyle prescribed by your statutes, so that I might observe it continually.
PSA 119:34 Give me understanding so that I might observe your law, and keep it with all my heart.
PSA 119:35 Guide me in the path of your commands, for I delight to walk in it.
PSA 119:36 Give me a desire for your rules, rather than for wealth gained unjustly.
PSA 119:37 Turn my eyes away from what is worthless! Revive me with your word!
PSA 119:38 Confirm to your servant your promise, which you made to the one who honors you.
PSA 119:39 Take away the insults that I dread! Indeed, your regulations are good.
PSA 119:40 Look, I long for your precepts. Revive me with your deliverance!
PSA 119:41 May I experience your loyal love, O Lord, and your deliverance, as you promised.
PSA 119:42 Then I will have a reply for the one who insults me, for I trust in your word.
PSA 119:43 Do not completely deprive me of a truthful testimony, for I await your justice.
PSA 119:44 Then I will keep your law continually now and for all time.
PSA 119:45 I will be secure, for I seek your precepts.
PSA 119:46 I will speak about your regulations before kings and not be ashamed.
PSA 119:47 I will find delight in your commands, which I love.
PSA 119:48 I will lift my hands to your commands, which I love, and I will meditate on your statutes.
PSA 119:49 Remember your word to your servant, for you have given me hope.
PSA 119:50 This is what comforts me in my trouble, for your promise revives me.
PSA 119:51 Arrogant people do nothing but scoff at me. Yet I do not turn aside from your law.
PSA 119:52 I remember your ancient regulations, O Lord, and console myself.
PSA 119:53 Rage takes hold of me because of the wicked, those who reject your law.
PSA 119:54 Your statutes have been my songs in the house where I live.
PSA 119:55 I remember your name during the night, O Lord, and I will keep your law.
PSA 119:56 This has been my practice, for I observe your precepts.
PSA 119:57 The Lord is my source of security. I have determined to follow your instructions.
PSA 119:58 I seek your favor with all my heart. Have mercy on me as you promised!
PSA 119:59 I consider my actions and follow your rules.
PSA 119:60 I keep your commands eagerly and without delay.
PSA 119:61 The ropes of the wicked tighten around me, but I do not forget your law.
PSA 119:62 In the middle of the night I arise to thank you for your just regulations.
PSA 119:63 I am a friend to all your loyal followers, and to those who keep your precepts.
PSA 119:64 O Lord, your loyal love fills the earth. Teach me your statutes!
PSA 119:65 You are good to your servant, O Lord, just as you promised.
PSA 119:66 Teach me proper discernment and understanding! For I consider your commands to be reliable.
PSA 119:67 Before I was afflicted I used to stray off, but now I keep your instructions.
PSA 119:68 You are good and you do good. Teach me your statutes!
PSA 119:69 Arrogant people smear my reputation with lies, but I observe your precepts with all my heart.
PSA 119:70 Their hearts are calloused, but I find delight in your law.
PSA 119:71 It was good for me to suffer, so that I might learn your statutes.
PSA 119:72 The law you have revealed is more important to me than thousands of pieces of gold and silver.
PSA 119:73 Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding so that I might learn your commands.
PSA 119:74 Your loyal followers will be glad when they see me, for I find hope in your word.
PSA 119:75 I know, Lord, that your regulations are just. You disciplined me because of your faithful devotion to me.
PSA 119:76 May your loyal love console me, as you promised your servant.
PSA 119:77 May I experience your compassion, so I might live! For I find delight in your law.
PSA 119:78 May the arrogant be humiliated, for they have slandered me! But I meditate on your precepts.
PSA 119:79 May your loyal followers turn to me, those who know your rules.
PSA 119:80 May I be fully committed to your statutes, so that I might not be ashamed.
PSA 119:81 I desperately long for your deliverance. I find hope in your word.
PSA 119:82 My eyes grow tired as I wait for your promise to be fulfilled. I say, “When will you comfort me?”
PSA 119:83 For I am like a wineskin dried up in smoke. I do not forget your statutes.
PSA 119:84 How long must your servant endure this? When will you judge those who pursue me?
PSA 119:85 The arrogant dig pits to trap me, which violates your law.
PSA 119:86 All your commands are reliable. I am pursued without reason. Help me!
PSA 119:87 They have almost destroyed me here on the earth, but I do not reject your precepts.
PSA 119:88 Revive me with your loyal love, that I might keep the rules you have revealed.
PSA 119:89 O Lord, your instructions endure; they stand secure in heaven.
PSA 119:90 You demonstrate your faithfulness to all generations. You established the earth and it stood firm.
PSA 119:91 Today they stand firm by your decrees, for all things are your servants.
PSA 119:92 If I had not found encouragement in your law, I would have died in my sorrow.
PSA 119:93 I will never forget your precepts, for by them you have revived me.
PSA 119:94 I belong to you. Deliver me! For I seek your precepts.
PSA 119:95 The wicked prepare to kill me, yet I concentrate on your rules.
PSA 119:96 I realize that everything has its limits, but your commands are beyond full comprehension.
PSA 119:97 O how I love your law! All day long I meditate on it.
PSA 119:98 Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies, for I am always aware of them.
PSA 119:99 I have more insight than all my teachers, for I meditate on your rules.
PSA 119:100 I am more discerning than those older than I, for I observe your precepts.
PSA 119:101 I stay away from the evil path, so that I might keep your instructions.
PSA 119:102 I do not turn aside from your regulations, for you teach me.
PSA 119:103 Your words are sweeter in my mouth than honey!
PSA 119:104 Your precepts give me discernment. Therefore I hate all deceitful actions.
PSA 119:105 Your word is a lamp to walk by, and a light to illumine my path.
PSA 119:106 I have vowed and solemnly sworn to keep your just regulations.
PSA 119:107 I am suffering terribly. O Lord, revive me with your word!
PSA 119:108 O Lord, please accept the freewill offerings of my praise! Teach me your regulations!
PSA 119:109 My life is in continual danger, but I do not forget your law.
PSA 119:110 The wicked lay a trap for me, but I do not wander from your precepts.
PSA 119:111 I claim your rules as my permanent possession, for they give me joy.
PSA 119:112 I am determined to obey your statutes at all times, to the very end.
PSA 119:113 I hate people with divided loyalties, but I love your law.
PSA 119:114 You are my hiding place and my shield. I find hope in your word.
PSA 119:115 Turn away from me, you evil men, so that I can observe the commands of my God.
PSA 119:116 Sustain me as you promised, so that I will live. Do not disappoint me!
PSA 119:117 Support me, so that I will be delivered. Then I will focus on your statutes continually.
PSA 119:118 You despise all who stray from your statutes, for they are deceptive and unreliable.
PSA 119:119 You remove all the wicked of the earth like slag. Therefore I love your rules.
PSA 119:120 My body trembles because I fear you; I am afraid of your judgments.
PSA 119:121 I do what is fair and right. Do not abandon me to my oppressors!
PSA 119:122 Guarantee the welfare of your servant! Do not let the arrogant oppress me!
PSA 119:123 My eyes grow tired as I wait for your deliverance, for your reliable promise to be fulfilled.
PSA 119:124 Show your servant your loyal love! Teach me your statutes!
PSA 119:125 I am your servant. Give me insight, so that I can understand your rules.
PSA 119:126 It is time for the Lord to act – they break your law!
PSA 119:127 For this reason I love your commands more than gold, even purest gold.
PSA 119:128 For this reason I carefully follow all your precepts. I hate all deceitful actions.
PSA 119:129 Your rules are marvelous. Therefore I observe them.
PSA 119:130 Your instructions are a doorway through which light shines. They give insight to the untrained.
PSA 119:131 I open my mouth and pant, because I long for your commands.
PSA 119:132 Turn toward me and extend mercy to me, as you typically do to your loyal followers.
PSA 119:133 Direct my steps by your word! Do not let any sin dominate me!
PSA 119:134 Deliver me from oppressive men, so that I can keep your precepts.
PSA 119:135 Smile on your servant! Teach me your statutes!
PSA 119:136 Tears stream down from my eyes, because people do not keep your law.
PSA 119:137 You are just, O Lord, and your judgments are fair.
PSA 119:138 The rules you impose are just, and absolutely reliable.
PSA 119:139 My zeal consumes me, for my enemies forget your instructions.
PSA 119:140 Your word is absolutely pure, and your servant loves it!
PSA 119:141 I am insignificant and despised, yet I do not forget your precepts.
PSA 119:142 Your justice endures, and your law is reliable.
PSA 119:143 Distress and hardship confront me, yet I find delight in your commands.
PSA 119:144 Your rules remain just. Give me insight so that I can live.
PSA 119:145 I cried out with all my heart, “Answer me, O Lord! I will observe your statutes.”
PSA 119:146 I cried out to you, “Deliver me, so that I can keep your rules.”
PSA 119:147 I am up before dawn crying for help. I find hope in your word.
PSA 119:148 My eyes anticipate the nighttime hours, so that I can meditate on your word.
PSA 119:149 Listen to me because of your loyal love! O Lord, revive me, as you typically do!
PSA 119:150 Those who are eager to do wrong draw near; they are far from your law.
PSA 119:151 You are near, O Lord, and all your commands are reliable.
PSA 119:152 I learned long ago that you ordained your rules to last.
PSA 119:153 See my pain and rescue me! For I do not forget your law.
PSA 119:154 Fight for me and defend me! Revive me with your word!
PSA 119:155 The wicked have no chance for deliverance, for they do not seek your statutes.
PSA 119:156 Your compassion is great, O Lord. Revive me, as you typically do!
PSA 119:157 The enemies who chase me are numerous. Yet I do not turn aside from your rules.
PSA 119:158 I take note of the treacherous and despise them, because they do not keep your instructions.
PSA 119:159 See how I love your precepts! O Lord, revive me with your loyal love!
PSA 119:160 Your instructions are totally reliable; all your just regulations endure.
PSA 119:161 Rulers pursue me for no reason, yet I am more afraid of disobeying your instructions.
PSA 119:162 I rejoice in your instructions, like one who finds much plunder.
PSA 119:163 I hate and despise deceit; I love your law.
PSA 119:164 Seven times a day I praise you because of your just regulations.
PSA 119:165 Those who love your law are completely secure; nothing causes them to stumble.
PSA 119:166 I hope for your deliverance, O Lord, and I obey your commands.
PSA 119:167 I keep your rules; I love them greatly.
PSA 119:168 I keep your precepts and rules, for you are aware of everything I do.
PSA 119:169 Listen to my cry for help, O Lord! Give me insight by your word!
PSA 119:170 Listen to my appeal for mercy! Deliver me, as you promised.
PSA 119:171 May praise flow freely from my lips, for you teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:172 May my tongue sing about your instructions, for all your commands are just.
PSA 119:173 May your hand help me, for I choose to obey your precepts.
PSA 119:174 I long for your deliverance, O Lord; I find delight in your law.
PSA 119:175 May I live and praise you! May your regulations help me!
PSA 119:176 I have wandered off like a lost sheep. Come looking for your servant, for I do not forget your commands.
PSA 120:1 A song of ascents. In my distress I cried out to the Lord and he answered me.
PSA 120:2 I said, “O Lord, rescue me from those who lie with their lips and those who deceive with their tongue.
PSA 120:3 How will he severely punish you, you deceptive talker?
PSA 120:4 Here’s how! With the sharp arrows of warriors, with arrowheads forged over the hot coals.
PSA 120:5 How miserable I am! For I have lived temporarily in Meshech; I have resided among the tents of Kedar.
PSA 120:6 For too long I have had to reside with those who hate peace.
PSA 120:7 I am committed to peace, but when I speak, they want to make war.
PSA 121:1 A song of ascents. I look up toward the hills. From where does my help come?
PSA 121:2 My help comes from the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth!
PSA 121:3 May he not allow your foot to slip! May your protector not sleep!
PSA 121:4 Look! Israel’s protector does not sleep or slumber!
PSA 121:5 The Lord is your protector; the Lord is the shade at your right hand.
PSA 121:6 The sun will not harm you by day, or the moon by night.
PSA 121:7 The Lord will protect you from all harm; he will protect your life.
PSA 121:8 The Lord will protect you in all you do, now and forevermore.
PSA 122:1 A song of ascents, by David. I was glad because they said to me, “We will go to the Lord’s temple.”
PSA 122:2 Our feet are standing inside your gates, O Jerusalem.
PSA 122:3 Jerusalem is a city designed to accommodate an assembly.
PSA 122:4 The tribes go up there, the tribes of the Lord, where it is required that Israel give thanks to the name of the Lord.
PSA 122:5 Indeed, the leaders sit there on thrones and make legal decisions, on the thrones of the house of David.
PSA 122:6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem! May those who love her prosper!
PSA 122:7 May there be peace inside your defenses, and prosperity inside your fortresses!
PSA 122:8 For the sake of my brothers and my neighbors I will say, “May there be peace in you!”
PSA 122:9 For the sake of the temple of the Lord our God I will pray for you to prosper.
PSA 123:1 A song of ascents. I look up toward you, the one enthroned in heaven.
PSA 123:2 Look, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, as the eyes of a female servant look to the hand of her mistress, so my eyes will look to the Lord, our God, until he shows us favor.
PSA 123:3 Show us favor, O Lord, show us favor! For we have had our fill of humiliation, and then some.
PSA 123:4 We have had our fill of the taunts of the self-assured, of the contempt of the proud.
PSA 124:1 A song of ascents, by David. “If the Lord had not been on our side” – let Israel say this! –
PSA 124:2 if the Lord had not been on our side, when men attacked us,
PSA 124:3 they would have swallowed us alive, when their anger raged against us.
PSA 124:4 The water would have overpowered us; the current would have overwhelmed us.
PSA 124:5 The raging water would have overwhelmed us.
PSA 124:6 The Lord deserves praise, for he did not hand us over as prey to their teeth.
PSA 124:7 We escaped with our lives, like a bird from a hunter’s snare. The snare broke, and we escaped.
PSA 124:8 Our deliverer is the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth.
PSA 125:1 A song of ascents. Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount Zion; it cannot be upended and will endure forever.
PSA 125:2 As the mountains surround Jerusalem, so the Lord surrounds his people, now and forevermore.
PSA 125:3 Indeed, the scepter of a wicked king will not settle upon the allotted land of the godly. Otherwise the godly might do what is wrong.
PSA 125:4 Do good, O Lord, to those who are good, to the morally upright!
PSA 125:5 As for those who are bent on traveling a sinful path, may the Lord remove them, along with those who behave wickedly! May Israel experience peace!
PSA 126:1 A song of ascents. When the Lord restored the well-being of Zion, we thought we were dreaming.
PSA 126:2 At that time we laughed loudly and shouted for joy. At that time the nations said, “The Lord has accomplished great things for these people.”
PSA 126:3 The Lord did indeed accomplish great things for us. We were happy.
PSA 126:4 O Lord, restore our well-being, just as the streams in the arid south are replenished.
PSA 126:5 Those who shed tears as they plant will shout for joy when they reap the harvest.
PSA 126:6 The one who weeps as he walks along, carrying his bag of seed, will certainly come in with a shout of joy, carrying his sheaves of grain.
PSA 127:1 A song of ascents, by Solomon. If the Lord does not build a house, then those who build it work in vain. If the Lord does not guard a city, then the watchman stands guard in vain.
PSA 127:2 It is vain for you to rise early, come home late, and work so hard for your food. Yes, he can provide for those whom he loves even when they sleep.
PSA 127:3 Yes, sons are a gift from the Lord, the fruit of the womb is a reward.
PSA 127:4 Sons born during one’s youth are like arrows in a warrior’s hand.
PSA 127:5 How blessed is the man who fills his quiver with them! They will not be put to shame when they confront enemies at the city gate.
PSA 128:1 A song of ascents. How blessed is every one of the Lord’s loyal followers, each one who keeps his commands!
PSA 128:2 You will eat what you worked so hard to grow. You will be blessed and secure.
PSA 128:3 Your wife will be like a fruitful vine in the inner rooms of your house; your children will be like olive branches, as they sit all around your table.
PSA 128:4 Yes indeed, the man who fears the Lord will be blessed in this way.
PSA 128:5 May the Lord bless you from Zion, that you might see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life,
PSA 128:6 and that you might see your grandchildren. May Israel experience peace!
PSA 129:1 A song of ascents. “Since my youth they have often attacked me,” let Israel say.
PSA 129:2 “Since my youth they have often attacked me, but they have not defeated me.
PSA 129:3 The plowers plowed my back; they made their furrows long.
PSA 129:4 The Lord is just; he cut the ropes of the wicked.”
PSA 129:5 May all who hate Zion be humiliated and turned back!
PSA 129:6 May they be like the grass on the rooftops which withers before one can even pull it up,
PSA 129:7 which cannot fill the reaper’s hand, or the lap of the one who gathers the grain!
PSA 129:8 Those who pass by will not say, “May you experience the Lord’s blessing! We pronounce a blessing on you in the name of the Lord.”
PSA 130:1 A song of ascents. From the deep water I cry out to you, O Lord.
PSA 130:2 O Lord, listen to me! Pay attention to my plea for mercy!
PSA 130:3 If you, O Lord, were to keep track of sins, O Lord, who could stand before you?
PSA 130:4 But you are willing to forgive, so that you might be honored.
PSA 130:5 I rely on the Lord, I rely on him with my whole being; I wait for his assuring word.
PSA 130:6 I yearn for the Lord, more than watchmen do for the morning, yes, more than watchmen do for the morning.
PSA 130:7 O Israel, hope in the Lord, for the Lord exhibits loyal love, and is more than willing to deliver.
PSA 130:8 He will deliver Israel from all the consequences of their sins.
PSA 131:1 A song of ascents, by David. O Lord, my heart is not proud, nor do I have a haughty look. I do not have great aspirations, or concern myself with things that are beyond me.
PSA 131:2 Indeed I am composed and quiet, like a young child carried by its mother; I am content like the young child I carry.
PSA 131:3 O Israel, hope in the Lord now and forevermore!
PSA 132:1 A song of ascents. O Lord, for David’s sake remember all his strenuous effort,
PSA 132:2 and how he made a vow to the Lord, and swore an oath to the powerful ruler of Jacob.
PSA 132:3 He said, “I will not enter my own home, or get into my bed.
PSA 132:4 I will not allow my eyes to sleep, or my eyelids to slumber,
PSA 132:5 until I find a place for the Lord, a fine dwelling place for the powerful ruler of Jacob.”
PSA 132:6 Look, we heard about it in Ephrathah, we found it in the territory of Jaar.
PSA 132:7 Let us go to his dwelling place! Let us worship before his footstool!
PSA 132:8 Ascend, O Lord, to your resting place, you and the ark of your strength!
PSA 132:9 May your priests be clothed with integrity! May your loyal followers shout for joy!
PSA 132:10 For the sake of David, your servant, do not reject your chosen king!
PSA 132:11 The Lord made a reliable promise to David; he will not go back on his word. He said, “I will place one of your descendants on your throne.
PSA 132:12 If your sons keep my covenant and the rules I teach them, their sons will also sit on your throne forever.”
PSA 132:13 Certainly the Lord has chosen Zion; he decided to make it his home.
PSA 132:14 He said, “This will be my resting place forever; I will live here, for I have chosen it.
PSA 132:15 I will abundantly supply what she needs; I will give her poor all the food they need.
PSA 132:16 I will protect her priests, and her godly people will shout exuberantly.
PSA 132:17 There I will make David strong; I have determined that my chosen king’s dynasty will continue.
PSA 132:18 I will humiliate his enemies, and his crown will shine.
PSA 133:1 A song of ascents, by David. Look! How good and how pleasant it is when brothers live together!
PSA 133:2 It is like fine oil poured on the head which flows down the beard – Aaron’s beard, and then flows down his garments.
PSA 133:3 It is like the dew of Hermon, which flows down upon the hills of Zion. Indeed that is where the Lord has decreed a blessing will be available – eternal life.
PSA 134:1 A song of ascents. Attention! Praise the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who serve in the Lord’s temple during the night.
PSA 134:2 Lift your hands toward the sanctuary and praise the Lord!
PSA 134:3 May the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth, bless you from Zion!
PSA 135:1 Praise the Lord! Praise the name of the Lord! Offer praise, you servants of the Lord,
PSA 135:2 who serve in the Lord’s temple, in the courts of the temple of our God.
PSA 135:3 Praise the Lord, for the Lord is good! Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant!
PSA 135:4 Indeed, the Lord has chosen Jacob for himself, Israel to be his special possession.
PSA 135:5 Yes, I know the Lord is great, and our Lord is superior to all gods.
PSA 135:6 He does whatever he pleases in heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the ocean depths.
PSA 135:7 He causes the clouds to arise from the end of the earth, makes lightning bolts accompany the rain, and brings the wind out of his storehouses.
PSA 135:8 He struck down the firstborn of Egypt, including both men and animals.
PSA 135:9 He performed awesome deeds and acts of judgment in your midst, O Egypt, against Pharaoh and all his servants.
PSA 135:10 He defeated many nations, and killed mighty kings –
PSA 135:11 Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan.
PSA 135:12 He gave their land as an inheritance, as an inheritance to Israel his people.
PSA 135:13 O Lord, your name endures, your reputation, O Lord, lasts.
PSA 135:14 For the Lord vindicates his people, and has compassion on his servants.
PSA 135:15 The nations’ idols are made of silver and gold, they are man-made.
PSA 135:16 They have mouths, but cannot speak, eyes, but cannot see,
PSA 135:17 and ears, but cannot hear. Indeed, they cannot breathe.
PSA 135:18 Those who make them will end up like them, as will everyone who trusts in them.
PSA 135:19 O family of Israel, praise the Lord! O family of Aaron, praise the Lord!
PSA 135:20 O family of Levi, praise the Lord! You loyal followers of the Lord, praise the Lord!
PSA 135:21 The Lord deserves praise in Zion – he who dwells in Jerusalem. Praise the Lord!
PSA 136:1 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for his loyal love endures.
PSA 136:2 Give thanks to the God of gods, for his loyal love endures.
PSA 136:3 Give thanks to the Lord of lords, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:4 to the one who performs magnificent, amazing deeds all by himself, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:5 to the one who used wisdom to make the heavens, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:6 to the one who spread out the earth over the water, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:7 to the one who made the great lights, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:8 the sun to rule by day, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:9 the moon and stars to rule by night, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:10 to the one who struck down the firstborn of Egypt, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:11 and led Israel out from their midst, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:12 with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:13 to the one who divided the Red Sea in two, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:14 and led Israel through its midst, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:15 and tossed Pharaoh and his army into the Red Sea, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:16 to the one who led his people through the wilderness, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:17 to the one who struck down great kings, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:18 and killed powerful kings, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:19 Sihon, king of the Amorites, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:20 Og, king of Bashan, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:21 and gave their land as an inheritance, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:22 as an inheritance to Israel his servant, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:23 to the one who remembered us when we were down, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:24 and snatched us away from our enemies, for his loyal love endures,
PSA 136:25 to the one who gives food to all living things, for his loyal love endures.
PSA 136:26 Give thanks to the God of heaven, for his loyal love endures!
PSA 137:1 By the rivers of Babylon we sit down and weep when we remember Zion.
PSA 137:2 On the poplars in her midst we hang our harps,
PSA 137:3 for there our captors ask us to compose songs; those who mock us demand that we be happy, saying: “Sing for us a song about Zion!”
PSA 137:4 How can we sing a song to the Lord in a foreign land?
PSA 137:5 If I forget you, O Jerusalem, may my right hand be crippled!
PSA 137:6 May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth, if I do not remember you, and do not give Jerusalem priority over whatever gives me the most joy.
PSA 137:7 Remember, O Lord, what the Edomites did on the day Jerusalem fell. They said, “Tear it down, tear it down, right to its very foundation!”
PSA 137:8 O daughter Babylon, soon to be devastated! How blessed will be the one who repays you for what you dished out to us!
PSA 137:9 How blessed will be the one who grabs your babies and smashes them on a rock!
PSA 138:1 By David. I will give you thanks with all my heart; before the heavenly assembly I will sing praises to you.
PSA 138:2 I will bow down toward your holy temple, and give thanks to your name, because of your loyal love and faithfulness, for you have exalted your promise above the entire sky.
PSA 138:3 When I cried out for help, you answered me. You made me bold and energized me.
PSA 138:4 Let all the kings of the earth give thanks to you, O Lord, when they hear the words you speak.
PSA 138:5 Let them sing about the Lord’s deeds, for the Lord’s splendor is magnificent.
PSA 138:6 Though the Lord is exalted, he takes note of the lowly, and recognizes the proud from far away.
PSA 138:7 Even when I must walk in the midst of danger, you revive me. You oppose my angry enemies, and your right hand delivers me.
PSA 138:8 The Lord avenges me. O Lord, your loyal love endures. Do not abandon those whom you have made!
PSA 139:1 For the music director, a psalm of David. O Lord, you examine me and know.
PSA 139:2 You know when I sit down and when I get up; even from far away you understand my motives.
PSA 139:3 You carefully observe me when I travel or when I lie down to rest; you are aware of everything I do.
PSA 139:4 Certainly my tongue does not frame a word without you, O Lord, being thoroughly aware of it.
PSA 139:5 You squeeze me in from behind and in front; you place your hand on me.
PSA 139:6 Your knowledge is beyond my comprehension; it is so far beyond me, I am unable to fathom it.
PSA 139:7 Where can I go to escape your spirit? Where can I flee to escape your presence?
PSA 139:8 If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there. If I were to sprawl out in Sheol, there you would be.
PSA 139:9 If I were to fly away on the wings of the dawn, and settle down on the other side of the sea,
PSA 139:10 even there your hand would guide me, your right hand would grab hold of me.
PSA 139:11 If I were to say, “Certainly the darkness will cover me, and the light will turn to night all around me,”
PSA 139:12 even the darkness is not too dark for you to see, and the night is as bright as day; darkness and light are the same to you.
PSA 139:13 Certainly you made my mind and heart; you wove me together in my mother’s womb.
PSA 139:14 I will give you thanks because your deeds are awesome and amazing. You knew me thoroughly;
PSA 139:15 my bones were not hidden from you, when I was made in secret and sewed together in the depths of the earth.
PSA 139:16 Your eyes saw me when I was inside the womb. All the days ordained for me were recorded in your scroll before one of them came into existence.
PSA 139:17 How difficult it is for me to fathom your thoughts about me, O God! How vast is their sum total!
PSA 139:18 If I tried to count them, they would outnumber the grains of sand. Even if I finished counting them, I would still have to contend with you.
PSA 139:19 If only you would kill the wicked, O God! Get away from me, you violent men!
PSA 139:20 They rebel against you and act deceitfully; your enemies lie.
PSA 139:21 O Lord, do I not hate those who hate you, and despise those who oppose you?
PSA 139:22 I absolutely hate them, they have become my enemies!
PSA 139:23 Examine me, and probe my thoughts! Test me, and know my concerns!
PSA 139:24 See if there is any idolatrous tendency in me, and lead me in the reliable ancient path!
PSA 140:1 For the music director; a psalm of David. O Lord, rescue me from wicked men! Protect me from violent men,
PSA 140:2 who plan ways to harm me. All day long they stir up conflict.
PSA 140:3 Their tongues wound like a serpent; a viper’s venom is behind their lips. (Selah)
PSA 140:4 O Lord, shelter me from the power of the wicked! Protect me from violent men, who plan to knock me over.
PSA 140:5 Proud men hide a snare for me; evil men spread a net by the path; they set traps for me. (Selah)
PSA 140:6 I say to the Lord, “You are my God.” O Lord, pay attention to my plea for mercy!
PSA 140:7 O sovereign Lord, my strong deliverer, you shield my head in the day of battle.
PSA 140:8 O Lord, do not let the wicked have their way! Do not allow their plan to succeed when they attack! (Selah)
PSA 140:9 As for the heads of those who surround me – may the harm done by their lips overwhelm them!
PSA 140:10 May he rain down fiery coals upon them! May he throw them into the fire! From bottomless pits they will not escape.
PSA 140:11 A slanderer will not endure on the earth; calamity will hunt down a violent man and strike him down.
PSA 140:12 I know that the Lord defends the cause of the oppressed and vindicates the poor.
PSA 140:13 Certainly the godly will give thanks to your name; the morally upright will live in your presence.
PSA 141:1 A psalm of David. O Lord, I cry out to you. Come quickly to me! Pay attention to me when I cry out to you!
PSA 141:2 May you accept my prayer like incense, my uplifted hands like the evening offering!
PSA 141:3 O Lord, place a guard on my mouth! Protect the opening of my lips!
PSA 141:4 Do not let me have evil desires, or participate in sinful activities with men who behave wickedly. I will not eat their delicacies.
PSA 141:5 May the godly strike me in love and correct me! May my head not refuse choice oil! Indeed, my prayer is a witness against their evil deeds.
PSA 141:6 They will be thrown down the side of a cliff by their judges. They will listen to my words, for they are pleasant.
PSA 141:7 As when one plows and breaks up the soil, so our bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol.
PSA 141:8 Surely I am looking to you, O sovereign Lord. In you I take shelter. Do not expose me to danger!
PSA 141:9 Protect me from the snare they have laid for me, and the traps the evildoers have set.
PSA 141:10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets, while I escape.
PSA 142:1 A well-written song by David, when he was in the cave; a prayer. To the Lord I cry out; to the Lord I plead for mercy.
PSA 142:2 I pour out my lament before him; I tell him about my troubles.
PSA 142:3 Even when my strength leaves me, you watch my footsteps. In the path where I walk they have hidden a trap for me.
PSA 142:4 Look to the right and see! No one cares about me. I have nowhere to run; no one is concerned about my life.
PSA 142:5 I cry out to you, O Lord; I say, “You are my shelter, my security in the land of the living.”
PSA 142:6 Listen to my cry for help, for I am in serious trouble! Rescue me from those who chase me, for they are stronger than I am.
PSA 142:7 Free me from prison, that I may give thanks to your name. Because of me the godly will assemble, for you will vindicate me.
PSA 143:1 A psalm of David. O Lord, hear my prayer! Pay attention to my plea for help! Because of your faithfulness and justice, answer me!
PSA 143:2 Do not sit in judgment on your servant, for no one alive is innocent before you.
PSA 143:3 Certainly my enemies chase me. They smash me into the ground. They force me to live in dark regions, like those who have been dead for ages.
PSA 143:4 My strength leaves me; I am absolutely shocked.
PSA 143:5 I recall the old days; I meditate on all you have done; I reflect on your accomplishments.
PSA 143:6 I spread my hands out to you in prayer; my soul thirsts for you in a parched land.
PSA 143:7 Answer me quickly, Lord! My strength is fading. Do not reject me, or I will join those descending into the grave.
PSA 143:8 May I hear about your loyal love in the morning, for I trust in you. Show me the way I should go, because I long for you.
PSA 143:9 Rescue me from my enemies, O Lord! I run to you for protection.
PSA 143:10 Teach me to do what pleases you, for you are my God. May your kind presence lead me into a level land.
PSA 143:11 O Lord, for the sake of your reputation, revive me! Because of your justice, rescue me from trouble!
PSA 143:12 As a demonstration of your loyal love, destroy my enemies! Annihilate all who threaten my life, for I am your servant.
PSA 144:1 By David. The Lord, my protector, deserves praise – the one who trains my hands for battle, and my fingers for war,
PSA 144:2 who loves me and is my stronghold, my refuge and my deliverer, my shield and the one in whom I take shelter, who makes nations submit to me.
PSA 144:3 O Lord, of what importance is the human race, that you should notice them? Of what importance is mankind, that you should be concerned about them?
PSA 144:4 People are like a vapor, their days like a shadow that disappears.
PSA 144:5 O Lord, make the sky sink and come down! Touch the mountains and make them smolder!
PSA 144:6 Hurl lightning bolts and scatter them! Shoot your arrows and rout them!
PSA 144:7 Reach down from above! Grab me and rescue me from the surging water, from the power of foreigners,
PSA 144:8 who speak lies, and make false promises.
PSA 144:9 O God, I will sing a new song to you! Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument, I will sing praises to you,
PSA 144:10 the one who delivers kings, and rescued David his servant from a deadly sword.
PSA 144:11 Grab me and rescue me from the power of foreigners, who speak lies, and make false promises.
PSA 144:12 Then our sons will be like plants, that quickly grow to full size. Our daughters will be like corner pillars, carved like those in a palace.
PSA 144:13 Our storehouses will be full, providing all kinds of food. Our sheep will multiply by the thousands and fill our pastures.
PSA 144:14 Our cattle will be weighted down with produce. No one will break through our walls, no one will be taken captive, and there will be no terrified cries in our city squares.
PSA 144:15 How blessed are the people who experience these things! How blessed are the people whose God is the Lord!
PSA 145:1 A psalm of praise, by David. I will extol you, my God, O king! I will praise your name continually!
PSA 145:2 Every day I will praise you! I will praise your name continually!
PSA 145:3 The Lord is great and certainly worthy of praise! No one can fathom his greatness!
PSA 145:4 One generation will praise your deeds to another, and tell about your mighty acts!
PSA 145:5 I will focus on your honor and majestic splendor, and your amazing deeds!
PSA 145:6 They will proclaim the power of your awesome acts! I will declare your great deeds!
PSA 145:7 They will talk about the fame of your great kindness, and sing about your justice.
PSA 145:8 The Lord is merciful and compassionate; he is patient and demonstrates great loyal love.
PSA 145:9 The Lord is good to all, and has compassion on all he has made.
PSA 145:10 All he has made will give thanks to the Lord. Your loyal followers will praise you.
PSA 145:11 They will proclaim the splendor of your kingdom; they will tell about your power,
PSA 145:12 so that mankind might acknowledge your mighty acts, and the majestic splendor of your kingdom.
PSA 145:13 Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and your dominion endures through all generations.
PSA 145:14 The Lord supports all who fall, and lifts up all who are bent over.
PSA 145:15 Everything looks to you in anticipation, and you provide them with food on a regular basis.
PSA 145:16 You open your hand, and fill every living thing with the food they desire.
PSA 145:17 The Lord is just in all his actions, and exhibits love in all he does.
PSA 145:18 The Lord is near all who cry out to him, all who cry out to him sincerely.
PSA 145:19 He satisfies the desire of his loyal followers; he hears their cry for help and delivers them.
PSA 145:20 The Lord protects those who love him, but he destroys all the wicked.
PSA 145:21 My mouth will praise the Lord. Let all who live praise his holy name forever!
PSA 146:1 Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord, O my soul!
PSA 146:2 I will praise the Lord as long as I live! I will sing praises to my God as long as I exist!
PSA 146:3 Do not trust in princes, or in human beings, who cannot deliver!
PSA 146:4 Their life’s breath departs, they return to the ground; on that day their plans die.
PSA 146:5 How blessed is the one whose helper is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in the Lord his God,
PSA 146:6 the one who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, who remains forever faithful,
PSA 146:7 vindicates the oppressed, and gives food to the hungry. The Lord releases the imprisoned.
PSA 146:8 The Lord gives sight to the blind. The Lord lifts up all who are bent over. The Lord loves the godly.
PSA 146:9 The Lord protects those residing outside their native land; he lifts up the fatherless and the widow, but he opposes the wicked.
PSA 146:10 The Lord rules forever, your God, O Zion, throughout the generations to come! Praise the Lord!
PSA 147:1 Praise the Lord, for it is good to sing praises to our God! Yes, praise is pleasant and appropriate!
PSA 147:2 The Lord rebuilds Jerusalem, and gathers the exiles of Israel.
PSA 147:3 He heals the brokenhearted, and bandages their wounds.
PSA 147:4 He counts the number of the stars; he names all of them.
PSA 147:5 Our Lord is great and has awesome power; there is no limit to his wisdom.
PSA 147:6 The Lord lifts up the oppressed, but knocks the wicked to the ground.
PSA 147:7 Offer to the Lord a song of thanks! Sing praises to our God to the accompaniment of a harp!
PSA 147:8 He covers the sky with clouds, provides the earth with rain, and causes grass to grow on the hillsides.
PSA 147:9 He gives food to the animals, and to the young ravens when they chirp.
PSA 147:10 He is not enamored with the strength of a horse, nor is he impressed by the warrior’s strong legs.
PSA 147:11 The Lord takes delight in his faithful followers, and in those who wait for his loyal love.
PSA 147:12 Extol the Lord, O Jerusalem! Praise your God, O Zion!
PSA 147:13 For he makes the bars of your gates strong. He blesses your children within you.
PSA 147:14 He brings peace to your territory. He abundantly provides for you the best grain.
PSA 147:15 He sends his command through the earth; swiftly his order reaches its destination.
PSA 147:16 He sends the snow that is white like wool; he spreads the frost that is white like ashes.
PSA 147:17 He throws his hailstones like crumbs. Who can withstand the cold wind he sends?
PSA 147:18 He then orders it all to melt; he breathes on it, and the water flows.
PSA 147:19 He proclaims his word to Jacob, his statutes and regulations to Israel.
PSA 147:20 He has not done so with any other nation; they are not aware of his regulations. Praise the Lord!
PSA 148:1 Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord from the sky! Praise him in the heavens!
PSA 148:2 Praise him, all his angels! Praise him, all his heavenly assembly!
PSA 148:3 Praise him, O sun and moon! Praise him, all you shiny stars!
PSA 148:4 Praise him, O highest heaven, and you waters above the sky!
PSA 148:5 Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he gave the command and they came into existence.
PSA 148:6 He established them so they would endure; he issued a decree that will not be revoked.
PSA 148:7 Praise the Lord from the earth, you sea creatures and all you ocean depths,
PSA 148:8 O fire and hail, snow and clouds, O stormy wind that carries out his orders,
PSA 148:9 you mountains and all you hills, you fruit trees and all you cedars,
PSA 148:10 you animals and all you cattle, you creeping things and birds,
PSA 148:11 you kings of the earth and all you nations, you princes and all you leaders on the earth,
PSA 148:12 you young men and young women, you elderly, along with you children!
PSA 148:13 Let them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is exalted; his majesty extends over the earth and sky.
PSA 148:14 He has made his people victorious, and given all his loyal followers reason to praise – the Israelites, the people who are close to him. Praise the Lord!
PSA 149:1 Praise the Lord! Sing to the Lord a new song! Praise him in the assembly of the godly!
PSA 149:2 Let Israel rejoice in their Creator! Let the people of Zion delight in their king!
PSA 149:3 Let them praise his name with dancing! Let them sing praises to him to the accompaniment of the tambourine and harp!
PSA 149:4 For the Lord takes delight in his people; he exalts the oppressed by delivering them.
PSA 149:5 Let the godly rejoice because of their vindication! Let them shout for joy upon their beds!
PSA 149:6 May they praise God while they hold a two-edged sword in their hand,
PSA 149:7 in order to take revenge on the nations, and punish foreigners.
PSA 149:8 They bind their kings in chains, and their nobles in iron shackles,
PSA 149:9 and execute the judgment to which their enemies have been sentenced. All his loyal followers will be vindicated. Praise the Lord!
PSA 150:1 Praise the Lord! Praise God in his sanctuary! Praise him in the sky, which testifies to his strength!
PSA 150:2 Praise him for his mighty acts! Praise him for his surpassing greatness!
PSA 150:3 Praise him with the blast of the horn! Praise him with the lyre and the harp!
PSA 150:4 Praise him with the tambourine and with dancing! Praise him with stringed instruments and the flute!
PSA 150:5 Praise him with loud cymbals! Praise him with clanging cymbals!
PSA 150:6 Let everything that has breath praise the Lord! Praise the Lord!
PRO 1:1 The Proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel:
PRO 1:2 To learn wisdom and moral instruction, and to discern wise counsel.
PRO 1:3 To receive moral instruction in skillful living, in righteousness, justice, and equity.
PRO 1:4 To impart shrewdness to the morally naive, and a discerning plan to the young person.
PRO 1:5 (Let the wise also hear and gain instruction, and let the discerning acquire guidance! )
PRO 1:6 To discern the meaning of a proverb and a parable, the sayings of the wise and their riddles.
PRO 1:7 Fearing the Lord is the beginning of moral knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and instruction.
PRO 1:8 Listen, my child, to the instruction from your father, and do not forsake the teaching from your mother.
PRO 1:9 For they will be like an elegant garland on your head, and like pendants around your neck.
PRO 1:10 My child, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent!
PRO 1:11 If they say, “Come with us! We will lie in wait to shed blood; we will ambush an innocent person capriciously.
PRO 1:12 We will swallow them alive like Sheol, those full of vigor like those going down to the Pit.
PRO 1:13 We will seize all kinds of precious wealth; we will fill our houses with plunder.
PRO 1:14 Join with us! We will all share equally in what we steal.”
PRO 1:15 My child, do not go down their way, withhold yourself from their path;
PRO 1:16 for they are eager to inflict harm, and they hasten to shed blood.
PRO 1:17 Surely it is futile to spread a net in plain sight of any bird,
PRO 1:18 but these men lie in wait for their own blood, they ambush their own lives!
PRO 1:19 Such are the ways of all who gain profit unjustly; it takes away the life of those who obtain it!
PRO 1:20 Wisdom calls out in the street, she shouts loudly in the plazas;
PRO 1:21 at the head of the noisy streets she calls, in the entrances of the gates in the city she utters her words:
PRO 1:22 “How long will you simpletons love naiveté? How long will mockers delight in mockery and fools hate knowledge?
PRO 1:23 If only you will respond to my rebuke, then I will pour out my thoughts to you and I will make my words known to you.
PRO 1:24 However, because I called but you refused to listen, because I stretched out my hand but no one paid attention,
PRO 1:25 because you neglected all my advice, and did not comply with my rebuke,
PRO 1:26 so I myself will laugh when disaster strikes you, I will mock when what you dread comes,
PRO 1:27 when what you dread comes like a whirlwind, and disaster strikes you like a devastating storm, when distressing trouble comes on you.
PRO 1:28 Then they will call to me, but I will not answer; they will diligently seek me, but they will not find me.
PRO 1:29 Because they hated moral knowledge, and did not choose to fear the Lord,
PRO 1:30 they did not comply with my advice, they spurned all my rebuke.
PRO 1:31 Therefore they will eat from the fruit of their way, and they will be stuffed full of their own counsel.
PRO 1:32 For the waywardness of the simpletons will kill them, and the careless ease of fools will destroy them.
PRO 1:33 But the one who listens to me will live in security, and will be at ease from the dread of harm.
PRO 2:1 My child, if you receive my words, and store up my commands within you,
PRO 2:2 by making your ear attentive to wisdom, and by turning your heart to understanding,
PRO 2:3 indeed, if you call out for discernment – raise your voice for understanding –
PRO 2:4 if you seek it like silver, and search for it like hidden treasure,
PRO 2:5 then you will understand how to fear the Lord, and you will discover knowledge about God.
PRO 2:6 For the Lord gives wisdom, and from his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.
PRO 2:7 He stores up effective counsel for the upright, and is like a shield for those who live with integrity,
PRO 2:8 to guard the paths of the righteous and to protect the way of his pious ones.
PRO 2:9 Then you will understand righteousness and justice and equity – every good way.
PRO 2:10 For wisdom will enter your heart, and moral knowledge will be attractive to you.
PRO 2:11 Discretion will protect you, understanding will guard you,
PRO 2:12 to deliver you from the way of the wicked, from those speaking perversity,
PRO 2:13 who leave the upright paths to walk on the dark ways,
PRO 2:14 who delight in doing evil, they rejoice in perverse evil;
PRO 2:15 whose paths are morally crooked, and who are devious in their ways;
PRO 2:16 to deliver you from the adulteress, from the sexually loose woman who speaks flattering words;
PRO 2:17 who leaves the husband from her younger days, and forgets her marriage covenant made before God.
PRO 2:18 For her house sinks down to death, and her paths lead to the place of the departed spirits.
PRO 2:19 None who go in to her will return, nor will they reach the paths of life.
PRO 2:20 So you will walk in the way of good people, and will keep on the paths of the righteous.
PRO 2:21 For the upright will reside in the land, and those with integrity will remain in it,
PRO 2:22 but the wicked will be removed from the land, and the treacherous will be torn away from it.
PRO 3:1 My child, do not forget my teaching, but let your heart keep my commandments,
PRO 3:2 for they will provide a long and full life, and they will add well-being to you.
PRO 3:3 Do not let truth and mercy leave you; bind them around your neck, write them on the tablet of your heart.
PRO 3:4 Then you will find favor and good understanding, in the sight of God and people.
PRO 3:5 Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and do not rely on your own understanding.
PRO 3:6 Acknowledge him in all your ways, and he will make your paths straight.
PRO 3:7 Do not be wise in your own estimation; fear the Lord and turn away from evil.
PRO 3:8 This will bring healing to your body, and refreshment to your inner self.
PRO 3:9 Honor the Lord from your wealth and from the first fruits of all your crops;
PRO 3:10 then your barns will be filled completely, and your vats will overflow with new wine.
PRO 3:11 My child, do not despise discipline from the Lord, and do not loathe his rebuke.
PRO 3:12 For the Lord disciplines those he loves, just as a father disciplines the son in whom he delights.
PRO 3:13 Blessed is the one who finds wisdom, and the one who obtains understanding.
PRO 3:14 For her benefit is more profitable than silver, and her gain is better than gold.
PRO 3:15 She is more precious than rubies, and none of the things you desire can compare with her.
PRO 3:16 Long life is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honor.
PRO 3:17 Her ways are very pleasant, and all her paths are peaceful.
PRO 3:18 She is like a tree of life to those who obtain her, and everyone who grasps hold of her will be blessed.
PRO 3:19 By wisdom the Lord laid the foundation of the earth; he established the heavens by understanding.
PRO 3:20 By his knowledge the primordial sea was broken open, and the clouds drip down dew.
PRO 3:21 My child, do not let them escape from your sight; safeguard sound wisdom and discretion.
PRO 3:22 So they will give life to you, and grace to adorn your neck.
PRO 3:23 Then you will walk on your way with security, and you will not stumble.
PRO 3:24 When you lie down you will not be filled with fear; when you lie down your sleep will be pleasant.
PRO 3:25 You will not be afraid of sudden disaster, or when destruction overtakes the wicked;
PRO 3:26 for the Lord will be the source of your confidence, and he will guard your foot from being caught in a trap.
PRO 3:27 Do not withhold good from those who need it, when you have the ability to help.
PRO 3:28 Do not say to your neighbor, “Go! Return tomorrow and I will give it,” when you have it with you at the time.
PRO 3:29 Do not plot evil against your neighbor when he dwells by you unsuspectingly.
PRO 3:30 Do not accuse anyone without legitimate cause, if he has not treated you wrongly.
PRO 3:31 Do not envy a violent man, and do not choose to imitate any of his ways;
PRO 3:32 for one who goes astray is an abomination to the Lord, but he reveals his intimate counsel to the upright.
PRO 3:33 The Lord’s curse is on the household of the wicked, but he blesses the home of the righteous.
PRO 3:34 Although he is scornful to arrogant scoffers, yet he shows favor to the humble.
PRO 3:35 The wise inherit honor, but he holds fools up to public contempt.
PRO 4:1 Listen, children, to a father’s instruction, and pay attention so that you may gain discernment.
PRO 4:2 Because I give you good instruction, do not forsake my teaching.
PRO 4:3 When I was a son to my father, a tender only child before my mother,
PRO 4:4 he taught me, and he said to me: “Let your heart lay hold of my words; keep my commands so that you will live.
PRO 4:5 Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding; do not forget and do not turn aside from the words I speak.
PRO 4:6 Do not forsake wisdom, and she will protect you; love her, and she will guard you.
PRO 4:7 Wisdom is supreme – so acquire wisdom, and whatever you acquire, acquire understanding!
PRO 4:8 Esteem her highly and she will exalt you; she will honor you if you embrace her.
PRO 4:9 She will place a fair garland on your head; she will bestow a beautiful crown on you.”
PRO 4:10 Listen, my child, and accept my words, so that the years of your life will be many.
PRO 4:11 I will guide you in the way of wisdom and I will lead you in upright paths.
PRO 4:12 When you walk, your steps will not be hampered, and when you run, you will not stumble.
PRO 4:13 Hold on to instruction, do not let it go; protect it, because it is your life.
PRO 4:14 Do not enter the path of the wicked or walk in the way of those who are evil.
PRO 4:15 Avoid it, do not go on it; turn away from it, and go on.
PRO 4:16 For they cannot sleep unless they cause harm; they are robbed of sleep until they make someone stumble.
PRO 4:17 For they eat bread gained from wickedness and drink wine obtained from violence.
PRO 4:18 But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light, growing brighter and brighter until full day.
PRO 4:19 The way of the wicked is like gloomy darkness; they do not know what causes them to stumble.
PRO 4:20 My child, pay attention to my words; listen attentively to my sayings.
PRO 4:21 Do not let them depart from your sight, guard them within your heart;
PRO 4:22 for they are life to those who find them and healing to one’s entire body.
PRO 4:23 Guard your heart with all vigilance, for from it are the sources of life.
PRO 4:24 Remove perverse speech from your mouth; keep devious talk far from your lips.
PRO 4:25 Let your eyes look directly in front of you and let your gaze look straight before you.
PRO 4:26 Make the path for your feet level, so that all your ways may be established.
PRO 4:27 Do not turn to the right or to the left; turn yourself away from evil.
PRO 5:1 My child, be attentive to my wisdom, pay close attention to my understanding,
PRO 5:2 in order to safeguard discretion, and that your lips may guard knowledge.
PRO 5:3 For the lips of the adulterous woman drip honey, and her seductive words are smoother than olive oil,
PRO 5:4 but in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.
PRO 5:5 Her feet go down to death; her steps lead straight to the grave.
PRO 5:6 Lest she should make level the path leading to life, her paths are unstable but she does not know it.
PRO 5:7 So now, children, listen to me; do not turn aside from the words I speak.
PRO 5:8 Keep yourself far from her, and do not go near the door of her house,
PRO 5:9 lest you give your vigor to others and your years to a cruel person,
PRO 5:10 lest strangers devour your strength, and your labor benefit another man’s house.
PRO 5:11 And at the end of your life you will groan when your flesh and your body are wasted away.
PRO 5:12 And you will say, “How I hated discipline! My heart spurned reproof!
PRO 5:13 For I did not obey my teachers and I did not heed my instructors.
PRO 5:14 I almost came to complete ruin in the midst of the whole congregation!”
PRO 5:15 Drink water from your own cistern and running water from your own well.
PRO 5:16 Should your springs be dispersed outside, your streams of water in the wide plazas?
PRO 5:17 Let them be for yourself alone, and not for strangers with you.
PRO 5:18 May your fountain be blessed, and may you rejoice in your young wife –
PRO 5:19 a loving doe, a graceful deer; may her breasts satisfy you at all times, may you be captivated by her love always.
PRO 5:20 But why should you be captivated, my son, by an adulteress, and embrace the bosom of a different woman?
PRO 5:21 For the ways of a person are in front of the Lord’s eyes, and the Lord weighs all that person’s paths.
PRO 5:22 The wicked will be captured by his own iniquities, and he will be held by the cords of his own sin.
PRO 5:23 He will die because there was no discipline; because of the greatness of his folly he will reel.
PRO 6:1 My child, if you have made a pledge for your neighbor, and have become a guarantor for a stranger,
PRO 6:2 if you have been ensnared by the words you have uttered, and have been caught by the words you have spoken,
PRO 6:3 then, my child, do this in order to deliver yourself, because you have fallen into your neighbor’s power: go, humble yourself, and appeal firmly to your neighbor.
PRO 6:4 Permit no sleep to your eyes or slumber to your eyelids.
PRO 6:5 Deliver yourself like a gazelle from a snare, and like a bird from the trap of the fowler.
PRO 6:6 Go to the ant, you sluggard; observe its ways and be wise!
PRO 6:7 It has no commander, overseer, or ruler,
PRO 6:8 yet it prepares its food in the summer; it gathers at the harvest what it will eat.
PRO 6:9 How long, you sluggard, will you lie there? When will you rise from your sleep?
PRO 6:10 A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to relax,
PRO 6:11 and your poverty will come like a robber, and your need like an armed man.
PRO 6:12 A worthless and wicked person walks around saying perverse things;
PRO 6:13 he winks with his eyes, signals with his feet, and points with his fingers;
PRO 6:14 he plots evil with perverse thoughts in his heart, he spreads contention at all times.
PRO 6:15 Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly; in an instant he will be broken, and there will be no remedy.
PRO 6:16 There are six things that the Lord hates, even seven things that are an abomination to him:
PRO 6:17 haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
PRO 6:18 a heart that devises wicked plans, feet that are swift to run to evil,
PRO 6:19 a false witness who pours out lies, and a person who spreads discord among family members.
PRO 6:20 My child, guard the commands of your father and do not forsake the instruction of your mother.
PRO 6:21 Bind them on your heart continually; fasten them around your neck.
PRO 6:22 When you walk about, they will guide you; when you lie down, they will watch over you; when you wake up, they will talk to you.
PRO 6:23 For the commandments are like a lamp, instruction is like a light, and rebukes of discipline are like the road leading to life,
PRO 6:24 by keeping you from the evil woman, from the smooth tongue of the loose woman.
PRO 6:25 Do not lust in your heart for her beauty, and do not let her captivate you with her alluring eyes;
PRO 6:26 for on account of a prostitute one is brought down to a loaf of bread, but the wife of another man preys on your precious life.
PRO 6:27 Can a man hold fire against his chest without burning his clothes?
PRO 6:28 Can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet?
PRO 6:29 So it is with the one who has sex with his neighbor’s wife; no one who touches her will escape punishment.
PRO 6:30 People do not despise a thief when he steals to fulfill his need when he is hungry.
PRO 6:31 Yet if he is caught he must repay seven times over, he might even have to give all the wealth of his house.
PRO 6:32 A man who commits adultery with a woman lacks wisdom, whoever does it destroys his own life.
PRO 6:33 He will be beaten and despised, and his reproach will not be wiped away;
PRO 6:34 for jealousy kindles a husband’s rage, and he will not show mercy when he takes revenge.
PRO 6:35 He will not consider any compensation; he will not be willing, even if you multiply the compensation.
PRO 7:1 My child, keep my words and treasure up my commands in your own keeping.
PRO 7:2 Keep my commands so that you may live, and obey my instruction as your most prized possession.
PRO 7:3 Bind them on your forearm; write them on the tablet of your heart.
PRO 7:4 Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” and call understanding a close relative,
PRO 7:5 so that they may keep you from the adulterous woman, from the loose woman who flatters you with her words.
PRO 7:6 For at the window of my house through my window lattice I looked out
PRO 7:7 and I saw among the naive – I discerned among the youths – a young man who lacked wisdom.
PRO 7:8 He was passing by the street near her corner, making his way along the road to her house
PRO 7:9 in the twilight, the evening, in the dark of the night.
PRO 7:10 Suddenly a woman came out to meet him! She was dressed like a prostitute and with secret intent.
PRO 7:11 (She is loud and rebellious, she does not remain at home –
PRO 7:12 at one time outside, at another in the wide plazas, and by every corner she lies in wait.)
PRO 7:13 So she grabbed him and kissed him, and with a bold expression she said to him,
PRO 7:14 “I have fresh meat at home; today I have fulfilled my vows!
PRO 7:15 That is why I came out to meet you, to look for you, and I found you!
PRO 7:16 I have spread my bed with elegant coverings, with richly colored fabric from Egypt.
PRO 7:17 I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
PRO 7:18 Come, let’s drink deeply of lovemaking until morning, let’s delight ourselves with sexual intercourse.
PRO 7:19 For my husband is not at home; he has gone on a journey of some distance.
PRO 7:20 He has taken a bag of money with him; he will not return until the end of the month.”
PRO 7:21 She persuaded him with persuasive words; with her smooth talk she compelled him.
PRO 7:22 Suddenly he went after her like an ox that goes to the slaughter, like a stag prancing into a trapper’s snare
PRO 7:23 till an arrow pierces his liver – like a bird hurrying into a trap, and he does not know that it will cost him his life.
PRO 7:24 So now, sons, listen to me, and pay attention to the words I speak.
PRO 7:25 Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways – do not wander into her pathways;
PRO 7:26 for she has brought down many fatally wounded, and all those she has slain are many.
PRO 7:27 Her house is the way to the grave, going down to the chambers of death.
PRO 8:1 Does not wisdom call out? Does not understanding raise her voice?
PRO 8:2 At the top of the elevated places along the way, at the intersection of the paths she takes her stand;
PRO 8:3 beside the gates opening into the city, at the entrance of the doorways she cries out:
PRO 8:4 “To you, O people, I call out, and my voice calls to all mankind.
PRO 8:5 You who are naive, discern wisdom! And you fools, understand discernment!
PRO 8:6 Listen, for I will speak excellent things, and my lips will utter what is right.
PRO 8:7 For my mouth speaks truth, and my lips hate wickedness.
PRO 8:8 All the words of my mouth are righteous; there is nothing in them twisted or crooked.
PRO 8:9 All of them are clear to the discerning and upright to those who find knowledge.
PRO 8:10 Receive my instruction rather than silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold.
PRO 8:11 For wisdom is better than rubies, and desirable things cannot be compared to her.
PRO 8:12 “I, wisdom, live with prudence, and I find knowledge and discretion.
PRO 8:13 The fear of the Lord is to hate evil; I hate arrogant pride and the evil way and perverse utterances.
PRO 8:14 Counsel and sound wisdom belong to me; I possess understanding and might.
PRO 8:15 Kings reign by means of me, and potentates decree righteousness;
PRO 8:16 by me princes rule, as well as nobles and all righteous judges.
PRO 8:17 I love those who love me, and those who seek me find me.
PRO 8:18 Riches and honor are with me, long-lasting wealth and righteousness.
PRO 8:19 My fruit is better than the purest gold, and what I produce is better than choice silver.
PRO 8:20 I walk in the path of righteousness, in the pathway of justice,
PRO 8:21 that I may cause those who love me to inherit wealth, and that I may fill their treasuries.
PRO 8:22 The Lord created me as the beginning of his works, before his deeds of long ago.
PRO 8:23 From eternity I was appointed, from the beginning, from before the world existed.
PRO 8:24 When there were no deep oceans I was born, when there were no springs overflowing with water;
PRO 8:25 before the mountains were set in place – before the hills – I was born,
PRO 8:26 before he made the earth and its fields, or the beginning of the dust of the world.
PRO 8:27 When he established the heavens, I was there; when he marked out the horizon over the face of the deep,
PRO 8:28 when he established the clouds above, when the fountains of the deep grew strong,
PRO 8:29 when he gave the sea his decree that the waters should not pass over his command, when he marked out the foundations of the earth,
PRO 8:30 then I was beside him as a master craftsman, and I was his delight day by day, rejoicing before him at all times,
PRO 8:31 rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and delighting in its people.
PRO 8:32 “So now, children, listen to me; blessed are those who keep my ways.
PRO 8:33 Listen to my instruction so that you may be wise, and do not neglect it.
PRO 8:34 Blessed is the one who listens to me, watching at my doors day by day, waiting beside my doorway.
PRO 8:35 For the one who finds me finds life and receives favor from the Lord.
PRO 8:36 But the one who does not find me brings harm to himself; all who hate me love death.”
PRO 9:1 Wisdom has built her house; she has carved out its seven pillars.
PRO 9:2 She has prepared her meat, she has mixed her wine; she also has arranged her table.
PRO 9:3 She has sent out her female servants; she calls out on the highest places of the city.
PRO 9:4 “Whoever is naive, let him turn in here,” she says to those who lack understanding.
PRO 9:5 “Come, eat some of my food, and drink some of the wine I have mixed.
PRO 9:6 Abandon your foolish ways so that you may live, and proceed in the way of understanding.”
PRO 9:7 Whoever corrects a mocker is asking for insult; whoever reproves a wicked person receives abuse.
PRO 9:8 Do not reprove a mocker or he will hate you; reprove a wise person and he will love you.
PRO 9:9 Give instruction to a wise person, and he will become wiser still; teach a righteous person and he will add to his learning.
PRO 9:10 The beginning of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and acknowledging the Holy One is understanding.
PRO 9:11 For because of me your days will be many, and years will be added to your life.
PRO 9:12 If you are wise, you are wise to your own advantage, but if you are a mocker, you alone must bear it.
PRO 9:13 The woman called Folly is brash, she is naive and does not know anything.
PRO 9:14 So she sits at the door of her house, on a seat at the highest point of the city,
PRO 9:15 calling out to those who are passing by her in the way, who go straight on their way.
PRO 9:16 “Whoever is simple, let him turn in here,” she says to those who lack understanding.
PRO 9:17 “Stolen waters are sweet, and food obtained in secret is pleasant!”
PRO 9:18 But they do not realize that the dead are there, that her guests are in the depths of the grave.
PRO 10:1 The Proverbs of Solomon: A wise child makes a father rejoice, but a foolish child is a grief to his mother.
PRO 10:2 Treasures gained by wickedness do not profit, but righteousness delivers from mortal danger.
PRO 10:3 The Lord satisfies the appetite of the righteous, but he thwarts the craving of the wicked.
PRO 10:4 The one who is lazy becomes poor, but the one who works diligently becomes wealthy.
PRO 10:5 The one who gathers crops in the summer is a wise son, but the one who sleeps during the harvest is a son who brings shame to himself.
PRO 10:6 Blessings are on the head of the righteous, but the speech of the wicked conceals violence.
PRO 10:7 The memory of the righteous is a blessing, but the reputation of the wicked will rot.
PRO 10:8 The wise person accepts instructions, but the one who speaks foolishness will come to ruin.
PRO 10:9 The one who conducts himself in integrity will live securely, but the one who behaves perversely will be found out.
PRO 10:10 The one who winks his eye causes trouble, and the one who speaks foolishness will come to ruin.
PRO 10:11 The teaching of the righteous is a fountain of life, but the speech of the wicked conceals violence.
PRO 10:12 Hatred stirs up dissension, but love covers all transgressions.
PRO 10:13 Wisdom is found in the words of the discerning person, but the one who lacks wisdom will be disciplined.
PRO 10:14 Those who are wise store up knowledge, but foolish speech leads to imminent destruction.
PRO 10:15 The wealth of a rich person is like a fortified city, but the poor are brought to ruin by their poverty.
PRO 10:16 The reward which the righteous receive is life; the recompense which the wicked receive is judgment.
PRO 10:17 The one who heeds instruction is on the way to life, but the one who rejects rebuke goes astray.
PRO 10:18 The one who conceals hatred utters lies, and the one who spreads slander is certainly a fool.
PRO 10:19 When words abound, transgression is inevitable, but the one who restrains his words is wise.
PRO 10:20 What the righteous say is like the best silver, but what the wicked think is of little value.
PRO 10:21 The teaching of the righteous feeds many, but fools die for lack of wisdom.
PRO 10:22 The blessing from the Lord makes a person rich, and he adds no sorrow to it.
PRO 10:23 Carrying out a wicked scheme is enjoyable to a fool, and so is wisdom for the one who has discernment.
PRO 10:24 What the wicked fears will come on him; what the righteous desire will be granted.
PRO 10:25 When the storm passes through, the wicked are swept away, but the righteous are an everlasting foundation.
PRO 10:26 Like vinegar to the teeth and like smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to those who send him.
PRO 10:27 Fearing the Lord prolongs life, but the life span of the wicked will be shortened.
PRO 10:28 The hope of the righteous is joy, but the expectation of the wicked will remain unfulfilled.
PRO 10:29 The way of the Lord is like a stronghold for the upright, but it is destruction to evildoers.
PRO 10:30 The righteous will never be moved, but the wicked will not inhabit the land.
PRO 10:31 The speech of the righteous bears the fruit of wisdom, but the one who speaks perversion will be destroyed.
PRO 10:32 The lips of the righteous know what is pleasing, but the speech of the wicked is perverse.
PRO 11:1 The Lord abhors dishonest scales, but an accurate weight is his delight.
PRO 11:2 When pride comes, then comes disgrace, but with humility comes wisdom.
PRO 11:3 The integrity of the upright guides them, but the crookedness of the unfaithful destroys them.
PRO 11:4 Wealth does not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from mortal danger.
PRO 11:5 The righteousness of the blameless will make straight their way, but the wicked person will fall by his own wickedness.
PRO 11:6 The righteousness of the upright will deliver them, but the faithless will be captured by their own desires.
PRO 11:7 When a wicked person dies, his expectation perishes, and the hope of his strength perishes.
PRO 11:8 The righteous person is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked turns up in his stead.
PRO 11:9 With his speech the godless person destroys his neighbor, but by knowledge the righteous will be delivered.
PRO 11:10 When the righteous do well, the city rejoices; when the wicked perish, there is joy.
PRO 11:11 A city is exalted by the blessing provided from the upright, but it is destroyed by the counsel of the wicked.
PRO 11:12 The one who denounces his neighbor lacks wisdom, but the one who has discernment keeps silent.
PRO 11:13 The one who goes about slandering others reveals secrets, but the one who is trustworthy conceals a matter.
PRO 11:14 When there is no guidance a nation falls, but there is success in the abundance of counselors.
PRO 11:15 The one who puts up security for a stranger will surely have trouble, but whoever avoids shaking hands will be secure.
PRO 11:16 A generous woman gains honor, and ruthless men seize wealth.
PRO 11:17 A kind person benefits himself, but a cruel person brings himself trouble.
PRO 11:18 The wicked person earns deceitful wages, but the one who sows righteousness reaps a genuine reward.
PRO 11:19 True righteousness leads to life, but the one who pursues evil pursues it to his own death.
PRO 11:20 The Lord abhors those who are perverse in heart, but those who are blameless in their ways are his delight.
PRO 11:21 Be assured that the evil person will certainly be punished, but the descendants of the righteous will not suffer unjust judgment.
PRO 11:22 Like a gold ring in a pig’s snout is a beautiful woman who rejects discretion.
PRO 11:23 What the righteous desire leads only to good, but what the wicked hope for leads to wrath.
PRO 11:24 One person is generous and yet grows more wealthy, but another withholds more than he should and comes to poverty.
PRO 11:25 A generous person will be enriched, and the one who provides water for others will himself be satisfied.
PRO 11:26 People will curse the one who withholds grain, but they will praise the one who sells it.
PRO 11:27 The one who diligently seeks good seeks favor, but the one who searches for evil – it will come to him.
PRO 11:28 The one who trusts in his riches will fall, but the righteous will flourish like a green leaf.
PRO 11:29 The one who troubles his family will inherit nothing, and the fool will be a servant to the wise person.
PRO 11:30 The fruit of the righteous is like a tree producing life, and the one who wins souls is wise.
PRO 11:31 If the righteous are recompensed on earth, how much more the wicked sinner!
PRO 12:1 The one who loves discipline loves knowledge, but the one who hates reproof is stupid.
PRO 12:2 A good person obtains favor from the Lord, but the Lord condemns a person with wicked schemes.
PRO 12:3 No one can be established through wickedness, but a righteous root cannot be moved.
PRO 12:4 A noble wife is the crown of her husband, but the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones.
PRO 12:5 The plans of the righteous are just; the counsels of the wicked are deceitful.
PRO 12:6 The words of the wicked lie in wait to shed innocent blood, but the words of the upright will deliver them.
PRO 12:7 The wicked are overthrown and perish, but the righteous household will stand.
PRO 12:8 A person is praised in accordance with his wisdom, but the one who has a twisted mind is despised.
PRO 12:9 Better is a person of humble standing who nevertheless has a servant, than one who pretends to be somebody important yet has no food.
PRO 12:10 A righteous person cares for the life of his animal, but even the most compassionate acts of the wicked are cruel.
PRO 12:11 The one who works his field will have plenty of food, but whoever chases daydreams lacks wisdom.
PRO 12:12 The wicked person desires a stronghold, but the righteous root endures.
PRO 12:13 The evil person is ensnared by the transgression of his speech, but the righteous person escapes out of trouble.
PRO 12:14 A person will be satisfied with good from the fruit of his words, and the work of his hands will be rendered to him.
PRO 12:15 The way of a fool is right in his own opinion, but the one who listens to advice is wise.
PRO 12:16 A fool’s annoyance is known at once, but the prudent overlooks an insult.
PRO 12:17 The faithful witness tells what is right, but a false witness speaks deceit.
PRO 12:18 Speaking recklessly is like the thrusts of a sword, but the words of the wise bring healing.
PRO 12:19 The one who tells the truth will endure forever, but the one who lies will last only for a moment.
PRO 12:20 Deceit is in the heart of those who plot evil, but those who promote peace have joy.
PRO 12:21 The righteous do not encounter any harm, but the wicked are filled with calamity.
PRO 12:22 The Lord abhors a person who lies, but those who deal truthfully are his delight.
PRO 12:23 The shrewd person conceals knowledge, but foolish people publicize folly.
PRO 12:24 The diligent person will rule, but the slothful will become a slave.
PRO 12:25 Anxiety in a person’s heart weighs him down, but an encouraging word brings him joy.
PRO 12:26 The righteous person is cautious in his friendship, but the way of the wicked leads them astray.
PRO 12:27 The lazy person does not roast his prey, but personal possessions are precious to the diligent.
PRO 12:28 In the path of righteousness there is life, but another path leads to death.
PRO 13:1 A wise son accepts his father’s discipline, but a scoffer does not listen to rebuke.
PRO 13:2 From the fruit of his speech a person eats good things, but the faithless desire the fruit of violence.
PRO 13:3 The one who guards his words guards his life, but whoever is talkative will come to ruin.
PRO 13:4 The appetite of the sluggard craves but gets nothing, but the desire of the diligent will be abundantly satisfied.
PRO 13:5 The righteous person hates anything false, but the wicked person acts in shameful disgrace.
PRO 13:6 Righteousness guards the one who lives with integrity, but wickedness overthrows the sinner.
PRO 13:7 There is one who pretends to be rich and yet has nothing; another pretends to be poor and yet possesses great wealth.
PRO 13:8 The ransom of a person’s life is his wealth, but the poor person hears no threat.
PRO 13:9 The light of the righteous shines brightly, but the lamp of the wicked goes out.
PRO 13:10 With pride comes only contention, but wisdom is with the well-advised.
PRO 13:11 Wealth gained quickly will dwindle away, but the one who gathers it little by little will become rich.
PRO 13:12 Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but a longing fulfilled is like a tree of life.
PRO 13:13 The one who despises instruction will pay the penalty, but whoever esteems instruction will be rewarded.
PRO 13:14 Instruction from the wise is like a life-giving fountain, to turn a person from deadly snares.
PRO 13:15 Keen insight wins favor, but the conduct of the unfaithful is harsh.
PRO 13:16 Every shrewd person acts with knowledge, but a fool displays his folly.
PRO 13:17 An unreliable messenger falls into trouble, but a faithful envoy brings healing.
PRO 13:18 The one who neglects discipline ends up in poverty and shame, but the one who accepts reproof is honored.
PRO 13:19 A desire fulfilled is sweet to the soul, but fools abhor turning away from evil.
PRO 13:20 The one who associates with the wise grows wise, but a companion of fools suffers harm.
PRO 13:21 Calamity pursues sinners, but prosperity rewards the righteous.
PRO 13:22 A benevolent person leaves an inheritance for his grandchildren, but the wealth of a sinner is stored up for the righteous.
PRO 13:23 There is abundant food in the field of the poor, but it is swept away by injustice.
PRO 13:24 The one who spares his rod hates his child, but the one who loves his child is diligent in disciplining him.
PRO 13:25 The righteous has enough food to satisfy his appetite, but the belly of the wicked lacks food.
PRO 14:1 Every wise woman builds her household, but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands.
PRO 14:2 The one who walks in his uprightness fears the Lord, but the one who is perverted in his ways despises him.
PRO 14:3 In the speech of a fool is a rod for his back, but the words of the wise protect them.
PRO 14:4 Where there are no oxen, the feeding trough is clean, but an abundant harvest is produced by strong oxen.
PRO 14:5 A truthful witness does not lie, but a false witness breathes out lies.
PRO 14:6 The scorner seeks wisdom but finds none, but understanding is easy for a discerning person.
PRO 14:7 Leave the presence of a foolish person, or you will not understand wise counsel.
PRO 14:8 The wisdom of the shrewd person is to discern his way, but the folly of fools is deception.
PRO 14:9 Fools mock at reparation, but among the upright there is favor.
PRO 14:10 The heart knows its own bitterness, and with its joy no one else can share.
PRO 14:11 The household of the wicked will be destroyed, but the tent of the upright will flourish.
PRO 14:12 There is a way that seems right to a person, but its end is the way that leads to death.
PRO 14:13 Even in laughter the heart may ache, and the end of joy may be grief.
PRO 14:14 The backslider will be paid back from his own ways, but a good person will be rewarded for his.
PRO 14:15 A naive person believes everything, but the shrewd person discerns his steps.
PRO 14:16 A wise person is cautious and turns from evil, but a fool throws off restraint and is overconfident.
PRO 14:17 A person who has a quick temper does foolish things, and a person with crafty schemes is hated.
PRO 14:18 The naive inherit folly, but the shrewd are crowned with knowledge.
PRO 14:19 Those who are evil will bow before those who are good, and the wicked will bow at the gates of the righteous.
PRO 14:20 A poor person is disliked even by his neighbors, but those who love the rich are many.
PRO 14:21 The one who despises his neighbor sins, but whoever is kind to the needy is blessed.
PRO 14:22 Do not those who devise evil go astray? But those who plan good exhibit faithful covenant love.
PRO 14:23 In all hard work there is profit, but merely talking about it only brings poverty.
PRO 14:24 The crown of the wise is their riches, but the folly of fools is folly.
PRO 14:25 A truthful witness rescues lives, but the one who breathes lies brings deception.
PRO 14:26 In the fear of the Lord one has strong confidence, and it will be a refuge for his children.
PRO 14:27 The fear of the Lord is like a life-giving fountain, to turn people from deadly snares.
PRO 14:28 A king’s glory is the abundance of people, but the lack of subjects is the ruin of a ruler.
PRO 14:29 The one who is slow to anger has great understanding, but the one who has a quick temper exalts folly.
PRO 14:30 A tranquil spirit revives the body, but envy is rottenness to the bones.
PRO 14:31 The one who oppresses the poor insults his Creator, but whoever shows favor to the needy honors him.
PRO 14:32 The wicked will be thrown down in his trouble, but the righteous have refuge even in the threat of death.
PRO 14:33 Wisdom rests in the heart of the discerning; it is known even in the heart of fools.
PRO 14:34 Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a disgrace to any people.
PRO 14:35 The king shows favor to a wise servant, but his wrath falls on one who acts shamefully.
PRO 15:1 A gentle response turns away anger, but a harsh word stirs up wrath.
PRO 15:2 The tongue of the wise treats knowledge correctly, but the mouth of the fool spouts out folly.
PRO 15:3 The eyes of the Lord are in every place, keeping watch on those who are evil and those who are good.
PRO 15:4 Speech that heals is like a life-giving tree, but a perverse tongue breaks the spirit.
PRO 15:5 A fool rejects his father’s discipline, but whoever heeds reproof shows good sense.
PRO 15:6 In the house of the righteous is abundant wealth, but the income of the wicked brings trouble.
PRO 15:7 The lips of the wise spread knowledge, but not so the heart of fools.
PRO 15:8 The Lord abhors the sacrifices of the wicked, but the prayer of the upright pleases him.
PRO 15:9 The Lord abhors the way of the wicked, but he loves those who pursue righteousness.
PRO 15:10 Severe discipline is for the one who abandons the way; the one who hates reproof will die.
PRO 15:11 Death and Destruction are before the Lord – how much more the hearts of humans!
PRO 15:12 The scorner does not love one who corrects him; he will not go to the wise.
PRO 15:13 A joyful heart makes the face cheerful, but by a painful heart the spirit is broken.
PRO 15:14 The discerning heart seeks knowledge, but the mouth of fools feeds on folly.
PRO 15:15 All the days of the afflicted are bad, but one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
PRO 15:16 Better is little with the fear of the Lord than great wealth and turmoil with it.
PRO 15:17 Better a meal of vegetables where there is love than a fattened ox where there is hatred.
PRO 15:18 A quick-tempered person stirs up dissension, but one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel.
PRO 15:19 The way of the sluggard is like a hedge of thorns, but the path of the upright is like a highway.
PRO 15:20 A wise child brings joy to his father, but a foolish person despises his mother.
PRO 15:21 Folly is a joy to one who lacks sense, but one who has understanding follows an upright course.
PRO 15:22 Plans fail when there is no counsel, but with abundant advisers they are established.
PRO 15:23 A person has joy in giving an appropriate answer, and a word at the right time – how good it is!
PRO 15:24 The path of life is upward for the wise person, to keep him from going downward to Sheol.
PRO 15:25 The Lord tears down the house of the proud, but he maintains the boundaries of the widow.
PRO 15:26 The Lord abhors the plans of the wicked, but pleasant words are pure.
PRO 15:27 The one who is greedy for gain troubles his household, but whoever hates bribes will live.
PRO 15:28 The heart of the righteous considers how to answer, but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things.
PRO 15:29 The Lord is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous.
PRO 15:30 A bright look brings joy to the heart, and good news gives health to the body.
PRO 15:31 The person who hears the reproof that leads to life is at home among the wise.
PRO 15:32 The one who refuses correction despises himself, but whoever hears reproof acquires understanding.
PRO 15:33 The fear of the Lord provides wise instruction, and before honor comes humility.
PRO 16:1 The intentions of the heart belong to a man, but the answer of the tongue comes from the Lord.
PRO 16:2 All a person’s ways seem right in his own opinion, but the Lord evaluates the motives.
PRO 16:3 Commit your works to the Lord, and your plans will be established.
PRO 16:4 The Lord works everything for its own ends – even the wicked for the day of disaster.
PRO 16:5 The Lord abhors every arrogant person; rest assured that they will not go unpunished.
PRO 16:6 Through loyal love and truth iniquity is appeased; through fearing the Lord one avoids evil.
PRO 16:7 When a person’s ways are pleasing to the Lord, he even reconciles his enemies to himself.
PRO 16:8 Better to have a little with righteousness than to have abundant income without justice.
PRO 16:9 A person plans his course, but the Lord directs his steps.
PRO 16:10 The divine verdict is in the words of the king, his pronouncements must not act treacherously against justice.
PRO 16:11 Honest scales and balances are from the Lord; all the weights in the bag are his handiwork.
PRO 16:12 Doing wickedness is an abomination to kings, because a throne is established in righteousness.
PRO 16:13 The delight of kings is righteous counsel, and they love the one who speaks uprightly.
PRO 16:14 A king’s wrath is like a messenger of death, but a wise person appeases it.
PRO 16:15 In the light of the king’s face there is life, and his favor is like the clouds of the spring rain.
PRO 16:16 How much better it is to acquire wisdom than gold; to acquire understanding is more desirable than silver.
PRO 16:17 The highway of the upright is to turn away from evil; the one who guards his way safeguards his life.
PRO 16:18 Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.
PRO 16:19 It is better to be lowly in spirit with the afflicted than to share the spoils with the proud.
PRO 16:20 The one who deals wisely in a matter will find success, and blessed is the one who trusts in the Lord.
PRO 16:21 The one who is wise in heart is called discerning, and kind speech increases persuasiveness.
PRO 16:22 Insight is like a life-giving fountain to the one who possesses it, but folly leads to the discipline of fools.
PRO 16:23 A wise person’s heart makes his speech wise and it adds persuasiveness to his words.
PRO 16:24 Pleasant words are like a honeycomb, sweet to the soul and healing to the bones.
PRO 16:25 There is a way that seems right to a person, but its end is the way that leads to death.
PRO 16:26 A laborer’s appetite works on his behalf, for his hunger urges him to work.
PRO 16:27 A wicked scoundrel digs up evil, and his slander is like a scorching fire.
PRO 16:28 A perverse person spreads dissension, and a gossip separates the closest friends.
PRO 16:29 A violent person entices his neighbor, and leads him down a path that is terrible.
PRO 16:30 The one who winks his eyes devises perverse things, and one who compresses his lips brings about evil.
PRO 16:31 Gray hair is like a crown of glory; it is attained in the path of righteousness.
PRO 16:32 Better to be slow to anger than to be a mighty warrior, and one who controls his temper is better than one who captures a city.
PRO 16:33 The dice are thrown into the lap, but their every decision is from the Lord.
PRO 17:1 Better is a dry crust of bread where there is quietness than a house full of feasting with strife.
PRO 17:2 A servant who acts wisely will rule over an heir who behaves shamefully, and will share the inheritance along with the relatives.
PRO 17:3 The crucible is for refining silver and the furnace is for gold, likewise the Lord tests hearts.
PRO 17:4 One who acts wickedly pays attention to evil counsel; a liar listens to a malicious tongue.
PRO 17:5 The one who mocks the poor insults his Creator; whoever rejoices over disaster will not go unpunished.
PRO 17:6 Grandchildren are like a crown to the elderly, and the glory of children is their parents.
PRO 17:7 Excessive speech is not becoming for a fool; how much less are lies for a ruler!
PRO 17:8 A bribe works like a charm for the one who offers it; in whatever he does he succeeds.
PRO 17:9 The one who forgives an offense seeks love, but whoever repeats a matter separates close friends.
PRO 17:10 A rebuke makes a greater impression on a discerning person than a hundred blows on a fool.
PRO 17:11 An evil person seeks only rebellion, and so a cruel messenger will be sent against him.
PRO 17:12 It is better for a person to meet a mother bear being robbed of her cubs, than to encounter a fool in his folly.
PRO 17:13 As for the one who repays evil for good, evil will not leave his house.
PRO 17:14 Starting a quarrel is like letting out water; stop it before strife breaks out!
PRO 17:15 The one who acquits the guilty and the one who condemns the innocent – both of them are an abomination to the Lord.
PRO 17:16 Of what use is money in the hand of a fool, since he has no intention of acquiring wisdom?
PRO 17:17 A friend loves at all times, and a relative is born to help in adversity.
PRO 17:18 The one who lacks wisdom strikes hands in pledge, and puts up financial security for his neighbor.
PRO 17:19 The one who loves a quarrel loves transgression; whoever builds his gate high seeks destruction.
PRO 17:20 The one who has a perverse heart does not find good, and the one who is deceitful in speech falls into trouble.
PRO 17:21 Whoever brings a fool into the world does so to his grief, and the father of a fool has no joy.
PRO 17:22 A cheerful heart brings good healing, but a crushed spirit dries up the bones.
PRO 17:23 A wicked person receives a bribe secretly to pervert the ways of justice.
PRO 17:24 Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person, but the eyes of a fool run to the ends of the earth.
PRO 17:25 A foolish child is a grief to his father, and bitterness to the mother who bore him.
PRO 17:26 It is terrible to punish a righteous person, and to flog honorable men is wrong.
PRO 17:27 The truly wise person restrains his words, and the one who stays calm is discerning.
PRO 17:28 Even a fool who remains silent is considered wise, and the one who holds his tongue is deemed discerning.
PRO 18:1 One who has isolated himself seeks his own desires; he rejects all sound judgment.
PRO 18:2 A fool takes no pleasure in understanding but only in disclosing what is on his mind.
PRO 18:3 When a wicked person arrives, contempt shows up with him, and with shame comes a reproach.
PRO 18:4 The words of a person’s mouth are like deep waters, and the fountain of wisdom is like a flowing brook.
PRO 18:5 It is terrible to show partiality to the wicked, by depriving a righteous man of justice.
PRO 18:6 The lips of a fool enter into strife, and his mouth invites a flogging.
PRO 18:7 The mouth of a fool is his ruin, and his lips are a snare for his life.
PRO 18:8 The words of a gossip are like choice morsels; they go down into the person’s innermost being.
PRO 18:9 The one who is slack in his work is a brother to one who destroys.
PRO 18:10 The name of the Lord is like a strong tower; the righteous person runs to it and is set safely on high.
PRO 18:11 The wealth of a rich person is like a strong city, and it is like a high wall in his imagination.
PRO 18:12 Before destruction the heart of a person is proud, but humility comes before honor.
PRO 18:13 The one who gives an answer before he listens – that is his folly and his shame.
PRO 18:14 A person’s spirit sustains him through sickness – but who can bear a crushed spirit?
PRO 18:15 The discerning person acquires knowledge, and the wise person seeks knowledge.
PRO 18:16 A person’s gift makes room for him, and leads him before important people.
PRO 18:17 The first to state his case seems right, until his opponent begins to cross-examine him.
PRO 18:18 A toss of a coin ends disputes, and settles the issue between strong opponents.
PRO 18:19 A relative offended is harder to reach than a strong city, and disputes are like the barred gates of a fortified citadel.
PRO 18:20 From the fruit of a person’s mouth his stomach is satisfied, with the product of his lips is he satisfied.
PRO 18:21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and those who love its use will eat its fruit.
PRO 18:22 The one who finds a wife finds what is enjoyable, and receives a pleasurable gift from the Lord.
PRO 18:23 A poor person makes supplications, but a rich man answers harshly.
PRO 18:24 A person who has friends may be harmed by them, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
PRO 19:1 Better is a poor person who walks in his integrity than one who is perverse in his speech and is a fool.
PRO 19:2 It is dangerous to have zeal without knowledge, and the one who acts hastily makes poor choices.
PRO 19:3 A person’s folly subverts his way, and his heart rages against the Lord.
PRO 19:4 Wealth adds many friends, but a poor person is separated from his friend.
PRO 19:5 A false witness will not go unpunished, and the one who spouts out lies will not escape punishment.
PRO 19:6 Many people entreat the favor of a generous person, and everyone is the friend of the person who gives gifts.
PRO 19:7 All the relatives of a poor person hate him; how much more do his friends avoid him – he pursues them with words, but they do not respond.
PRO 19:8 The one who acquires wisdom loves himself; the one who preserves understanding will prosper.
PRO 19:9 A false witness will not go unpunished, and the one who spouts out lies will perish.
PRO 19:10 Luxury is not appropriate for a fool; how much less for a servant to rule over princes!
PRO 19:11 A person’s wisdom makes him slow to anger, and it is his glory to overlook an offense.
PRO 19:12 A king’s wrath is like the roar of a lion, but his favor is like dew on the grass.
PRO 19:13 A foolish child is the ruin of his father, and a contentious wife is like a constant dripping.
PRO 19:14 A house and wealth are inherited from parents, but a prudent wife is from the Lord.
PRO 19:15 Laziness brings on a deep sleep, and the idle person will go hungry.
PRO 19:16 The one who obeys commandments guards his life; the one who despises his ways will die.
PRO 19:17 The one who is gracious to the poor lends to the Lord, and the Lord will repay him for his good deed.
PRO 19:18 Discipline your child, for there is hope, but do not set your heart on causing his death.
PRO 19:19 A person with great anger bears the penalty, but if you deliver him from it once, you will have to do it again.
PRO 19:20 Listen to advice and receive discipline, that you may become wise by the end of your life.
PRO 19:21 There are many plans in a person’s mind, but it is the counsel of the Lord which will stand.
PRO 19:22 What is desirable for a person is to show loyal love, and a poor person is better than a liar.
PRO 19:23 Fearing the Lord leads to life, and one who does so will live satisfied; he will not be afflicted by calamity.
PRO 19:24 The sluggard plunges his hand in the dish, and he will not even bring it back to his mouth!
PRO 19:25 Flog a scorner, and as a result the simpleton will learn prudence; correct a discerning person, and as a result he will understand knowledge.
PRO 19:26 The one who robs his father and chases away his mother is a son who brings shame and disgrace.
PRO 19:27 If you stop listening to instruction, my child, you will stray from the words of knowledge.
PRO 19:28 A crooked witness scorns justice, and the mouth of the wicked devours iniquity.
PRO 19:29 Judgments are prepared for scorners, and floggings for the backs of fools.
PRO 20:1 Wine is a mocker and strong drink is a brawler; whoever goes astray by them is not wise.
PRO 20:2 The king’s terrifying anger is like the roar of a lion; whoever provokes him sins against himself.
PRO 20:3 It is an honor for a person to cease from strife, but every fool quarrels.
PRO 20:4 The sluggard will not plow during the planting season, so at harvest time he looks for the crop but has nothing.
PRO 20:5 Counsel in a person’s heart is like deep water, but an understanding person draws it out.
PRO 20:6 Many people profess their loyalty, but a faithful person – who can find?
PRO 20:7 The righteous person behaves in integrity; blessed are his children after him.
PRO 20:8 A king sitting on the throne to judge separates out all evil with his eyes.
PRO 20:9 Who can say, “I have kept my heart clean; I am pure from my sin”?
PRO 20:10 Diverse weights and diverse measures – the Lord abhors both of them.
PRO 20:11 Even a young man is known by his actions, whether his activity is pure and whether it is right.
PRO 20:12 The ear that hears and the eye that sees – the Lord has made them both.
PRO 20:13 Do not love sleep, lest you become impoverished; open your eyes so that you might be satisfied with food.
PRO 20:14 “It’s worthless! It’s worthless!” says the buyer, but when he goes on his way, he boasts.
PRO 20:15 There is gold, and an abundance of rubies, but words of knowledge are like a precious jewel.
PRO 20:16 Take a man’s garment when he has given security for a stranger, and when he gives surety for strangers, hold him in pledge.
PRO 20:17 Bread gained by deceit tastes sweet to a person, but afterward his mouth will be filled with gravel.
PRO 20:18 Plans are established by counsel, so make war with guidance.
PRO 20:19 The one who goes about gossiping reveals secrets; therefore do not associate with someone who is always opening his mouth.
PRO 20:20 The one who curses his father and his mother, his lamp will be extinguished in the blackest darkness.
PRO 20:21 An inheritance gained easily in the beginning will not be blessed in the end.
PRO 20:22 Do not say, “I will pay back evil!” Wait for the Lord, so that he may vindicate you.
PRO 20:23 The Lord abhors differing weights, and dishonest scales are wicked.
PRO 20:24 The steps of a person are ordained by the Lord – so how can anyone understand his own way?
PRO 20:25 It is a snare for a person to rashly cry, “Holy!” and only afterward to consider what he has vowed.
PRO 20:26 A wise king separates out the wicked; he turns the threshing wheel over them.
PRO 20:27 The human spirit is like the lamp of the Lord, searching all his innermost parts.
PRO 20:28 Loyal love and truth preserve a king, and his throne is upheld by loyal love.
PRO 20:29 The glory of young men is their strength, and the splendor of old men is gray hair.
PRO 20:30 Beatings and wounds cleanse away evil, and floggings cleanse the innermost being.
PRO 21:1 The king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord like channels of water; he turns it wherever he wants.
PRO 21:2 All of a person’s ways seem right in his own opinion, but the Lord evaluates the motives.
PRO 21:3 To do righteousness and justice is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.
PRO 21:4 Haughty eyes and a proud heart – the agricultural product of the wicked is sin.
PRO 21:5 The plans of the diligent lead only to plenty, but everyone who is hasty comes only to poverty.
PRO 21:6 Making a fortune by a lying tongue is like a vapor driven back and forth; they seek death.
PRO 21:7 The violence done by the wicked will drag them away because they refuse to do what is right.
PRO 21:8 The way of the guilty person is devious, but as for the pure, his way is upright.
PRO 21:9 It is better to live on a corner of the housetop than in a house in company with a quarrelsome wife.
PRO 21:10 The appetite of the wicked desires evil; his neighbor is shown no favor in his eyes.
PRO 21:11 When a scorner is punished, the naive becomes wise; when a wise person is instructed, he gains knowledge.
PRO 21:12 The Righteous One considers the house of the wicked; he overthrows the wicked to their ruin.
PRO 21:13 The one who shuts his ears to the cry of the poor, he too will cry out and will not be answered.
PRO 21:14 A gift given in secret subdues anger, and a bribe given secretly subdues strong wrath.
PRO 21:15 Doing justice brings joy to the righteous and terror to those who do evil.
PRO 21:16 The one who wanders from the way of wisdom will end up in the company of the departed.
PRO 21:17 The one who loves pleasure will be a poor person; whoever loves wine and anointing oil will not be rich.
PRO 21:18 The wicked become a ransom for the righteous, and the faithless are taken in the place of the upright.
PRO 21:19 It is better to live in a desert land than with a quarrelsome and easily-provoked woman.
PRO 21:20 There is desirable treasure and olive oil in the dwelling of the wise, but a foolish person devours all he has.
PRO 21:21 The one who pursues righteousness and love finds life, bounty, and honor.
PRO 21:22 The wise person can scale the city of the mighty and bring down the stronghold in which they trust.
PRO 21:23 The one who guards his mouth and his tongue keeps his life from troubles.
PRO 21:24 A proud and arrogant person, whose name is “Scoffer,” acts with overbearing pride.
PRO 21:25 What the sluggard desires will kill him, for his hands refuse to work.
PRO 21:26 All day long he craves greedily, but the righteous gives and does not hold back.
PRO 21:27 The wicked person’s sacrifice is an abomination; how much more when he brings it with evil intent!
PRO 21:28 A lying witness will perish, but the one who reports accurately speaks forever.
PRO 21:29 A wicked person shows boldness with his face, but as for the upright, he discerns his ways.
PRO 21:30 There is no wisdom and there is no understanding, and there is no counsel against the Lord.
PRO 21:31 A horse is prepared for the day of battle, but the victory is from the Lord.
PRO 22:1 A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth, good favor more than silver or gold.
PRO 22:2 The rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the creator of them both.
PRO 22:3 A shrewd person sees danger and hides himself, but the naive keep right on going and suffer for it.
PRO 22:4 The reward for humility and fearing the Lord is riches and honor and life.
PRO 22:5 Thorns and snares are in the path of the perverse, but the one who guards himself keeps far from them.
PRO 22:6 Train a child in the way that he should go, and when he is old he will not turn from it.
PRO 22:7 The rich rule over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.
PRO 22:8 The one who sows iniquity will reap trouble, and the rod of his fury will end.
PRO 22:9 A generous person will be blessed, for he gives some of his food to the poor.
PRO 22:10 Drive out the scorner and contention will leave; strife and insults will cease.
PRO 22:11 The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is gracious – the king will be his friend.
PRO 22:12 The eyes of the Lord guard knowledge, but he overthrows the words of the faithless person.
PRO 22:13 The sluggard says, “There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the middle of the streets!”
PRO 22:14 The mouth of an adulteress is like a deep pit; the one against whom the Lord is angry will fall into it.
PRO 22:15 Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of discipline will drive it far from him.
PRO 22:16 The one who oppresses the poor to increase his own gain and the one who gives to the rich – both end up only in poverty.
PRO 22:17 Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise, and apply your heart to my instruction.
PRO 22:18 For it is pleasing if you keep these sayings within you, and they are ready on your lips.
PRO 22:19 So that your confidence may be in the Lord, I am making them known to you today – even you.
PRO 22:20 Have I not written thirty sayings for you, sayings of counsel and knowledge,
PRO 22:21 to show you true and reliable words, so that you may give accurate answers to those who sent you?
PRO 22:22 Do not exploit a poor person because he is poor and do not crush the needy in court,
PRO 22:23 for the Lord will plead their case and will rob those who are robbing them.
PRO 22:24 Do not make friends with an angry person, and do not associate with a wrathful person,
PRO 22:25 lest you learn his ways and entangle yourself in a snare.
PRO 22:26 Do not be one who strikes hands in pledge or who puts up security for debts.
PRO 22:27 If you do not have enough to pay, your bed will be taken right out from under you!
PRO 22:28 Do not move an ancient boundary stone which was put in place by your ancestors.
PRO 22:29 Do you see a person skilled in his work? He will take his position before kings; he will not take his position before obscure people.
PRO 23:1 When you sit down to eat with a ruler, consider carefully what is before you,
PRO 23:2 and put a knife to your throat if you possess a large appetite.
PRO 23:3 Do not crave that ruler’s delicacies, for that food is deceptive.
PRO 23:4 Do not wear yourself out to become rich; be wise enough to restrain yourself.
PRO 23:5 When you gaze upon riches, they are gone, for they surely make wings for themselves, and fly off into the sky like an eagle!
PRO 23:6 Do not eat the food of a stingy person, do not crave his delicacies;
PRO 23:7 for he is like someone calculating the cost in his mind. “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but his heart is not with you;
PRO 23:8 you will vomit up the little bit you have eaten, and will have wasted your pleasant words.
PRO 23:9 Do not speak in the ears of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of your words.
PRO 23:10 Do not move an ancient boundary stone, or take over the fields of the fatherless,
PRO 23:11 for their Protector is strong; he will plead their case against you.
PRO 23:12 Apply your heart to instruction and your ears to the words of knowledge.
PRO 23:13 Do not withhold discipline from a child; even if you strike him with the rod, he will not die.
PRO 23:14 If you strike him with the rod, you will deliver him from death.
PRO 23:15 My child, if your heart is wise, then my heart also will be glad;
PRO 23:16 my soul will rejoice when your lips speak what is right.
PRO 23:17 Do not let your heart envy sinners, but rather be zealous in fearing the Lord all the time.
PRO 23:18 For surely there is a future, and your hope will not be cut off.
PRO 23:19 Listen, my child, and be wise, and guide your heart on the right way.
PRO 23:20 Do not spend time among drunkards, among those who eat too much meat,
PRO 23:21 because drunkards and gluttons become impoverished, and drowsiness clothes them with rags.
PRO 23:22 Listen to your father who begot you, and do not despise your mother when she is old.
PRO 23:23 Acquire truth and do not sell it – wisdom, and discipline, and understanding.
PRO 23:24 The father of a righteous person will rejoice greatly; whoever fathers a wise child will have joy in him.
PRO 23:25 May your father and your mother have joy; may she who bore you rejoice.
PRO 23:26 Give me your heart, my son, and let your eyes observe my ways;
PRO 23:27 for a prostitute is like a deep pit; a harlot is like a narrow well.
PRO 23:28 Indeed, she lies in wait like a robber, and increases the unfaithful among men.
PRO 23:29 Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has complaints? Who has wounds without cause? Who has dullness of the eyes?
PRO 23:30 Those who linger over wine, those who go looking for mixed wine.
PRO 23:31 Do not look on the wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down smoothly.
PRO 23:32 Afterward it bites like a snake, and stings like a viper.
PRO 23:33 Your eyes will see strange things, and your mind will speak perverse things.
PRO 23:34 And you will be like one who lies down in the midst of the sea, and like one who lies down on the top of the rigging.
PRO 23:35 You will say, “They have struck me, but I am not harmed! They beat me, but I did not know it! When will I awake? I will look for another drink.”
PRO 24:1 Do not envy evil people, do not desire to be with them;
PRO 24:2 for their hearts contemplate violence, and their lips speak harm.
PRO 24:3 By wisdom a house is built, and through understanding it is established;
PRO 24:4 by knowledge its rooms are filled with all kinds of precious and pleasing treasures.
PRO 24:5 A wise warrior is strong, and a man of knowledge makes his strength stronger;
PRO 24:6 for with guidance you wage your war, and with numerous advisers there is victory.
PRO 24:7 Wisdom is unattainable for a fool; in court he does not open his mouth.
PRO 24:8 The one who plans to do evil will be called a scheming person.
PRO 24:9 A foolish scheme is sin, and the scorner is an abomination to people.
PRO 24:10 If you faint in the day of trouble, your strength is small!
PRO 24:11 Deliver those being taken away to death, and hold back those slipping to the slaughter.
PRO 24:12 If you say, “But we did not know about this,” does not the one who evaluates hearts consider? Does not the one who guards your life know? Will he not repay each person according to his deeds?
PRO 24:13 Eat honey, my child, for it is good, and honey from the honeycomb is sweet to your taste.
PRO 24:14 Likewise, know that wisdom is sweet to your soul; if you find it, you will have a future, and your hope will not be cut off.
PRO 24:15 Do not lie in wait like the wicked against the place where the righteous live; do not assault his home.
PRO 24:16 Although a righteous person may fall seven times, he gets up again, but the wicked will be brought down by calamity.
PRO 24:17 Do not rejoice when your enemy falls, and when he stumbles do not let your heart rejoice,
PRO 24:18 lest the Lord see it, and be displeased, and turn his wrath away from him.
PRO 24:19 Do not fret because of evil people or be envious of wicked people,
PRO 24:20 for the evil person has no future, and the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.
PRO 24:21 Fear the Lord, my child, as well as the king, and do not associate with rebels,
PRO 24:22 for suddenly their destruction will overtake them, and who knows the ruinous judgment both the Lord and the king can bring?
PRO 24:23 These sayings also are from the wise: To show partiality in judgment is terrible:
PRO 24:24 The one who says to the guilty, “You are innocent,” peoples will curse him, and nations will denounce him.
PRO 24:25 But there will be delight for those who convict the guilty, and a pleasing blessing will come on them.
PRO 24:26 Like a kiss on the lips is the one who gives an honest answer.
PRO 24:27 Establish your work outside and get your fields ready; afterward build your house.
PRO 24:28 Do not be a witness against your neighbor without cause, and do not deceive with your words.
PRO 24:29 Do not say, “I will do to him just as he has done to me; I will pay him back according to what he has done.”
PRO 24:30 I passed by the field of a sluggard, by the vineyard of one who lacks wisdom.
PRO 24:31 I saw that thorns had grown up all over it, the ground was covered with weeds, and its stone wall was broken down.
PRO 24:32 When I saw this, I gave careful consideration to it; I received instruction from what I saw:
PRO 24:33 “A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to relax,
PRO 24:34 and your poverty will come like a bandit, and your need like an armed robber.”
PRO 25:1 These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of King Hezekiah of Judah copied:
PRO 25:2 It is the glory of God to conceal a matter, and it is the glory of a king to search out a matter.
PRO 25:3 As the heaven is high and the earth is deep so the hearts of kings are unsearchable.
PRO 25:4 Remove the dross from the silver, and material for the silversmith will emerge;
PRO 25:5 remove the wicked from before the king, and his throne will be established in righteousness.
PRO 25:6 Do not honor yourself before the king, and do not stand in the place of great men;
PRO 25:7 for it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” than to put you lower before a prince, whom your eyes have seen.
PRO 25:8 Do not go out hastily to litigation, or what will you do afterward when your neighbor puts you to shame?
PRO 25:9 When you argue a case with your neighbor, do not reveal the secret of another person,
PRO 25:10 lest the one who hears it put you to shame and your infamy will never go away.
PRO 25:11 Like apples of gold in settings of silver, so is a word skillfully spoken.
PRO 25:12 Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover to the ear of the one who listens.
PRO 25:13 Like the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to those who send him, for he refreshes the heart of his masters.
PRO 25:14 Like cloudy skies and wind that produce no rain, so is the one who boasts of a gift not given.
PRO 25:15 Through patience a ruler can be persuaded, and a soft tongue can break a bone.
PRO 25:16 When you find honey, eat only what is sufficient for you, lest you become stuffed with it and vomit it up.
PRO 25:17 Don’t set foot too frequently in your neighbor’s house, lest he become weary of you and hate you.
PRO 25:18 Like a club or a sword or a sharp arrow, so is the one who testifies against his neighbor as a false witness.
PRO 25:19 Like a bad tooth or a foot out of joint, so is confidence in an unfaithful person at the time of trouble.
PRO 25:20 Like one who takes off a garment on a cold day, or like vinegar poured on soda, so is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.
PRO 25:21 If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat, and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink,
PRO 25:22 for you will heap coals of fire on his head, and the Lord will reward you.
PRO 25:23 The north wind brings forth rain, and a gossiping tongue brings forth an angry look.
PRO 25:24 It is better to live on a corner of the housetop than in a house in company with a quarrelsome wife.
PRO 25:25 Like cold water to a weary person, so is good news from a distant land.
PRO 25:26 Like a muddied spring and a polluted well, so is a righteous person who gives way before the wicked.
PRO 25:27 It is not good to eat too much honey, nor is it honorable for people to seek their own glory.
PRO 25:28 Like a city that is broken down and without a wall, so is a person who cannot control his temper.
PRO 26:1 Like snow in summer or rain in harvest, so honor is not fitting for a fool.
PRO 26:2 Like a fluttering bird or like a flying swallow, so a curse without cause does not come to rest.
PRO 26:3 A whip for the horse and a bridle for the donkey, and a rod for the backs of fools!
PRO 26:4 Do not answer a fool according to his folly, lest you yourself also be like him.
PRO 26:5 Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own estimation.
PRO 26:6 Like cutting off the feet or drinking violence, so is sending a message by the hand of a fool.
PRO 26:7 Like legs that hang limp from the lame, so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
PRO 26:8 Like tying a stone in a sling, so is giving honor to a fool.
PRO 26:9 Like a thorn that goes into the hand of a drunkard, so is a proverb in the mouth of a fool.
PRO 26:10 Like an archer who wounds at random, so is the one who hires a fool or hires any passer-by.
PRO 26:11 Like a dog that returns to its vomit, so a fool repeats his folly.
PRO 26:12 Do you see a man wise in his own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
PRO 26:13 The sluggard says, “There is a lion in the road! A lion in the streets!”
PRO 26:14 Like a door that turns on its hinges, so a sluggard turns on his bed.
PRO 26:15 The sluggard plunges his hand in the dish; he is too lazy to bring it back to his mouth.
PRO 26:16 The sluggard is wiser in his own estimation than seven people who respond with good sense.
PRO 26:17 Like one who grabs a wild dog by the ears, so is the person passing by who becomes furious over a quarrel not his own.
PRO 26:18 Like a madman who shoots firebrands and deadly arrows,
PRO 26:19 so is a person who deceives his neighbor, and says, “Was I not only joking?”
PRO 26:20 Where there is no wood, a fire goes out, and where there is no gossip, contention ceases.
PRO 26:21 Like charcoal is to burning coals, and wood to fire, so is a contentious person to kindle strife.
PRO 26:22 The words of a gossip are like delicious morsels; they go down into a person’s innermost being.
PRO 26:23 Like a coating of glaze over earthenware are fervent lips with an evil heart.
PRO 26:24 The one who hates others disguises it with his lips, but he stores up deceit within him.
PRO 26:25 When he speaks graciously, do not believe him, for there are seven abominations within him.
PRO 26:26 Though his hatred may be concealed by deceit, his evil will be uncovered in the assembly.
PRO 26:27 The one who digs a pit will fall into it; the one who rolls a stone – it will come back on him.
PRO 26:28 A lying tongue hates those crushed by it, and a flattering mouth works ruin.
PRO 27:1 Do not boast about tomorrow; for you do not know what a day may bring forth.
PRO 27:2 Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; someone else, and not your own lips.
PRO 27:3 A stone is heavy and sand is weighty, but vexation by a fool is more burdensome than the two of them.
PRO 27:4 Wrath is cruel and anger is overwhelming, but who can stand before jealousy?
PRO 27:5 Better is open rebuke than hidden love.
PRO 27:6 Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are excessive.
PRO 27:7 The one whose appetite is satisfied loathes honey, but to the hungry mouth every bitter thing is sweet.
PRO 27:8 Like a bird that wanders from its nest, so is a person who wanders from his home.
PRO 27:9 Ointment and incense make the heart rejoice, likewise the sweetness of one’s friend from sincere counsel.
PRO 27:10 Do not forsake your friend and your father’s friend, and do not enter your brother’s house in the day of your disaster; a neighbor nearby is better than a brother far away.
PRO 27:11 Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad, so that I may answer anyone who taunts me.
PRO 27:12 A shrewd person sees danger and hides himself, but the naive keep right on going and suffer for it.
PRO 27:13 Take a man’s garment when he has given security for a stranger, and when he gives surety for a stranger, hold him in pledge.
PRO 27:14 If someone blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning, it will be counted as a curse to him.
PRO 27:15 A continual dripping on a rainy day and a contentious wife are alike.
PRO 27:16 Whoever hides her hides the wind or grasps oil with his right hand.
PRO 27:17 As iron sharpens iron, so a person sharpens his friend.
PRO 27:18 The one who tends a fig tree will eat its fruit, and whoever takes care of his master will be honored.
PRO 27:19 As in water the face is reflected as a face, so a person’s heart reflects the person.
PRO 27:20 As Death and Destruction are never satisfied, so the eyes of a person are never satisfied.
PRO 27:21 As the crucible is for silver and the furnace is for gold, so a person is proved by the praise he receives.
PRO 27:22 If you should pound the fool in the mortar among the grain with the pestle, his foolishness would not depart from him.
PRO 27:23 Pay careful attention to the condition of your flocks, give careful attention to your herds,
PRO 27:24 for riches do not last forever, nor does a crown last from generation to generation.
PRO 27:25 When the hay is removed and new grass appears, and the grass from the hills is gathered in,
PRO 27:26 the lambs will be for your clothing, and the goats will be for the price of a field.
PRO 27:27 And there will be enough goat’s milk for your food, for the food of your household, and for the sustenance of your servant girls.
PRO 28:1 The wicked person flees when there is no one pursuing, but the righteous person is as confident as a lion.
PRO 28:2 When a country is rebellious it has many princes, but by someone who is discerning and knowledgeable order is maintained.
PRO 28:3 A poor person who oppresses the weak is like a driving rain without food.
PRO 28:4 Those who forsake the law praise the wicked, but those who keep the law contend with them.
PRO 28:5 Evil people do not understand justice, but those who seek the Lord understand it all.
PRO 28:6 A poor person who walks in his integrity is better than one who is perverse in his ways even though he is rich.
PRO 28:7 The one who keeps the law is a discerning child, but a companion of gluttons brings shame to his parents.
PRO 28:8 The one who increases his wealth by increasing interest gathers it for someone who is gracious to the needy.
PRO 28:9 The one who turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.
PRO 28:10 The one who leads the upright astray in an evil way will himself fall into his own pit, but the blameless will inherit what is good.
PRO 28:11 A rich person is wise in his own eyes, but a discerning poor person can evaluate him properly.
PRO 28:12 When the righteous rejoice, great is the glory, but when the wicked rise to power, people are sought out.
PRO 28:13 The one who covers his transgressions will not prosper, but whoever confesses them and forsakes them will find mercy.
PRO 28:14 Blessed is the one who is always cautious, but whoever hardens his heart will fall into evil.
PRO 28:15 Like a roaring lion or a roving bear, so is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
PRO 28:16 The prince who is a great oppressor lacks wisdom, but the one who hates unjust gain will prolong his days.
PRO 28:17 The one who is tormented by the murder of another will flee to the pit; let no one support him.
PRO 28:18 The one who walks blamelessly will be delivered, but whoever is perverse in his ways will fall at once.
PRO 28:19 The one who works his land will be satisfied with food, but whoever chases daydreams will have his fill of poverty.
PRO 28:20 A faithful person will have an abundance of blessings, but the one who hastens to gain riches will not go unpunished.
PRO 28:21 To show partiality is terrible, for a person will transgress over the smallest piece of bread.
PRO 28:22 The stingy person hastens after riches and does not know that poverty will overtake him.
PRO 28:23 The one who reproves another will in the end find more favor than the one who flatters with the tongue.
PRO 28:24 The one who robs his father and mother and says, “There is no transgression,” is a companion to the one who destroys.
PRO 28:25 The greedy person stirs up dissension, but the one who trusts in the Lord will prosper.
PRO 28:26 The one who trusts in his own heart is a fool, but the one who walks in wisdom will escape.
PRO 28:27 The one who gives to the poor will not lack, but whoever shuts his eyes to them will receive many curses.
PRO 28:28 When the wicked gain control, people hide themselves, but when they perish, the righteous increase.
PRO 29:1 The one who stiffens his neck after numerous rebukes will suddenly be destroyed without remedy.
PRO 29:2 When the righteous become numerous, the people rejoice; when the wicked rule, the people groan.
PRO 29:3 The man who loves wisdom brings joy to his father, but whoever associates with prostitutes wastes his wealth.
PRO 29:4 A king brings stability to a land by justice, but one who exacts tribute tears it down.
PRO 29:5 The one who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his steps.
PRO 29:6 In the transgression of an evil person there is a snare, but a righteous person can sing and rejoice.
PRO 29:7 The righteous person cares for the legal rights of the poor; the wicked does not understand such knowledge.
PRO 29:8 Scornful people inflame a city, but those who are wise turn away wrath.
PRO 29:9 If a wise person goes to court with a foolish person, there is no peace whether he is angry or laughs.
PRO 29:10 Bloodthirsty people hate someone with integrity; as for the upright, they seek his life.
PRO 29:11 A fool lets fly with all his temper, but a wise person keeps it back.
PRO 29:12 If a ruler listens to lies, all his ministers will be wicked.
PRO 29:13 The poor person and the oppressor have this in common: the Lord gives light to the eyes of them both.
PRO 29:14 If a king judges the poor in truth, his throne will be established forever.
PRO 29:15 A rod and reproof impart wisdom, but a child who is unrestrained brings shame to his mother.
PRO 29:16 When the wicked increase, transgression increases, but the righteous will see their downfall.
PRO 29:17 Discipline your child, and he will give you rest; he will bring you happiness.
PRO 29:18 When there is no prophetic vision the people cast off restraint, but the one who keeps the law, blessed is he!
PRO 29:19 A servant cannot be corrected by words, for although he understands, there is no answer.
PRO 29:20 Do you see someone who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
PRO 29:21 If someone pampers his servant from youth, he will be a weakling in the end.
PRO 29:22 An angry person stirs up dissension, and a wrathful person is abounding in transgression.
PRO 29:23 A person’s pride will bring him low, but one who has a lowly spirit will gain honor.
PRO 29:24 Whoever shares with a thief is his own enemy; he hears the oath to testify, but does not talk.
PRO 29:25 The fear of people becomes a snare, but whoever trusts in the Lord will be set on high.
PRO 29:26 Many people seek the face of a ruler, but it is from the Lord that one receives justice.
PRO 29:27 An unjust person is an abomination to the righteous, and the one who lives an upright life is an abomination to the wicked.
PRO 30:1 The words of Agur, the son of Jakeh; an oracle: This man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and to Ukal:
PRO 30:2 Surely I am more brutish than any other human being, and I do not have human understanding;
PRO 30:3 I have not learned wisdom, nor do I have knowledge of the Holy One.
PRO 30:4 Who has ascended into heaven, and then descended? Who has gathered up the winds in his fists? Who has bound up the waters in his cloak? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son’s name? – if you know!
PRO 30:5 Every word of God is purified; he is like a shield for those who take refuge in him.
PRO 30:6 Do not add to his words, lest he reprove you, and prove you to be a liar.
PRO 30:7 Two things I ask from you; do not refuse me before I die:
PRO 30:8 Remove falsehood and lies far from me; do not give me poverty or riches, feed me with my allotted portion of bread,
PRO 30:9 lest I become satisfied and act deceptively and say, “Who is the Lord?” Or lest I become poor and steal and demean the name of my God.
PRO 30:10 Do not slander a servant to his master, lest he curse you, and you are found guilty.
PRO 30:11 There is a generation who curse their fathers and do not bless their mothers.
PRO 30:12 There is a generation who are pure in their own eyes and yet are not washed from their filthiness.
PRO 30:13 There is a generation whose eyes are so lofty, and whose eyelids are lifted up disdainfully.
PRO 30:14 There is a generation whose teeth are like swords and whose molars are like knives to devour the poor from the earth and the needy from among the human race.
PRO 30:15 The leech has two daughters: “Give! Give!” There are three things that are never satisfied, four that never say, “Enough” –
PRO 30:16 the grave, the barren womb, land that is not satisfied with water, and fire that never says, “Enough!”
PRO 30:17 The eye that mocks at a father and despises obeying a mother – the ravens of the valley will peck it out and the young vultures will eat it.
PRO 30:18 There are three things that are too wonderful for me, four that I do not understand:
PRO 30:19 the way of an eagle in the sky, the way of a snake on a rock, the way of a ship in the sea, and the way of a man with a woman.
PRO 30:20 This is the way of an adulterous woman: she eats and wipes her mouth and says, “I have not done wrong.”
PRO 30:21 Under three things the earth trembles, and under four things it cannot bear up:
PRO 30:22 under a servant who becomes king, under a fool who is stuffed with food,
PRO 30:23 under an unloved woman who is married, and under a female servant who dispossesses her mistress.
PRO 30:24 There are four things on earth that are small, but they are exceedingly wise:
PRO 30:25 ants are creatures with little strength, but they prepare their food in the summer;
PRO 30:26 rock badgers are creatures with little power, but they make their homes in the crags;
PRO 30:27 locusts have no king, but they all go forward by ranks;
PRO 30:28 a lizard you can catch with the hand, but it gets into the palaces of the king.
PRO 30:29 There are three things that are magnificent in their step, four things that move about magnificently:
PRO 30:30 a lion, mightiest of the beasts, who does not retreat from anything;
PRO 30:31 a strutting rooster, a male goat, and a king with his army around him.
PRO 30:32 If you have done foolishly by exalting yourself or if you have planned evil, put your hand over your mouth!
PRO 30:33 For as the churning of milk produces butter and as punching the nose produces blood, so stirring up anger produces strife.
PRO 31:1 The words of King Lemuel, an oracle that his mother taught him:
PRO 31:2 O my son, O son of my womb, O son of my vows,
PRO 31:3 Do not give your strength to women, nor your ways to that which ruins kings.
PRO 31:4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, or for rulers to crave strong drink,
PRO 31:5 lest they drink and forget what is decreed, and remove from all the poor their legal rights.
PRO 31:6 Give strong drink to the one who is perishing, and wine to those who are bitterly distressed;
PRO 31:7 let them drink and forget their poverty, and remember their misery no more.
PRO 31:8 Open your mouth on behalf of those unable to speak, for the legal rights of all the dying.
PRO 31:9 Open your mouth, judge in righteousness, and plead the cause of the poor and needy.
PRO 31:10 Who can find a wife of noble character? For her value is far more than rubies.
PRO 31:11 The heart of her husband has confidence in her, and he has no lack of gain.
PRO 31:12 She brings him good and not evil all the days of her life.
PRO 31:13 She obtains wool and flax, and she is pleased to work with her hands.
PRO 31:14 She is like the merchant ships; she brings her food from afar.
PRO 31:15 She also gets up while it is still night, and provides food for her household and a portion to her female servants.
PRO 31:16 She considers a field and buys it; from her own income she plants a vineyard.
PRO 31:17 She begins her work vigorously, and she strengthens her arms.
PRO 31:18 She knows that her merchandise is good, and her lamp does not go out in the night.
PRO 31:19 Her hands take hold of the distaff, and her hands grasp the spindle.
PRO 31:20 She extends her hand to the poor, and reaches out her hand to the needy.
PRO 31:21 She is not afraid of the snow for her household, for all of her household are clothed with scarlet.
PRO 31:22 She makes for herself coverlets; her clothing is fine linen and purple.
PRO 31:23 Her husband is well-known in the city gate when he sits with the elders of the land.
PRO 31:24 She makes linen garments and sells them, and supplies the merchants with sashes.
PRO 31:25 She is clothed with strength and honor, and she can laugh at the time to come.
PRO 31:26 She opens her mouth with wisdom, and loving instruction is on her tongue.
PRO 31:27 She watches over the ways of her household, and does not eat the bread of idleness.
PRO 31:28 Her children rise up and call her blessed, her husband also praises her:
PRO 31:29 “Many daughters have done valiantly, but you surpass them all!”
PRO 31:30 Charm is deceitful and beauty is fleeting, but a woman who fears the Lord will be praised.
PRO 31:31 Give her credit for what she has accomplished, and let her works praise her in the city gates.
ECC 1:1 The words of the Teacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem:
ECC 1:2 “Futile! Futile!” laments the Teacher, “Absolutely futile! Everything is futile!”
ECC 1:3 What benefit do people get from all the effort which they expend on earth?
ECC 1:4 A generation comes and a generation goes, but the earth remains the same through the ages.
ECC 1:5 The sun rises and the sun sets; it hurries away to a place from which it rises again.
ECC 1:6 The wind goes to the south and circles around to the north; round and round the wind goes and on its rounds it returns.
ECC 1:7 All the streams flow into the sea, but the sea is not full, and to the place where the streams flow, there they will flow again.
ECC 1:8 All this monotony is tiresome; no one can bear to describe it: The eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor is the ear ever content with hearing.
ECC 1:9 What exists now is what will be, and what has been done is what will be done; there is nothing truly new on earth.
ECC 1:10 Is there anything about which someone can say, “Look at this! It is new!”? It was already done long ago, before our time.
ECC 1:11 No one remembers the former events, nor will anyone remember the events that are yet to happen; they will not be remembered by the future generations.
ECC 1:12 I, the Teacher, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem.
ECC 1:13 I decided to carefully and thoroughly examine all that has been accomplished on earth. I concluded: God has given people a burdensome task that keeps them occupied.
ECC 1:14 I reflected on everything that is accomplished by man on earth, and I concluded: Everything he has accomplished is futile – like chasing the wind!
ECC 1:15 What is bent cannot be straightened, and what is missing cannot be supplied.
ECC 1:16 I thought to myself, “I have become much wiser than any of my predecessors who ruled over Jerusalem; I have acquired much wisdom and knowledge.”
ECC 1:17 So I decided to discern the benefit of wisdom and knowledge over foolish behavior and ideas; however, I concluded that even this endeavor is like trying to chase the wind!
ECC 1:18 For with great wisdom comes great frustration; whoever increases his knowledge merely increases his heartache.
ECC 2:1 “Come now, I will try self-indulgent pleasure to see if it is worthwhile.” But I found that it also is futile.
ECC 2:2 I said of partying, “It is folly,” and of self-indulgent pleasure, “It accomplishes nothing!”
ECC 2:3 I thought deeply about the effects of indulging myself with wine (all the while my mind was guiding me with wisdom) and the effects of behaving foolishly, so that I might discover what is profitable for people to do on earth during the few days of their lives.
ECC 2:4 I increased my possessions: I built houses for myself; I planted vineyards for myself.
ECC 2:5 I designed royal gardens and parks for myself, and I planted all kinds of fruit trees in them.
ECC 2:6 I constructed pools of water for myself, to irrigate my grove of flourishing trees.
ECC 2:7 I purchased male and female slaves, and I owned slaves who were born in my house; I also possessed more livestock – both herds and flocks – than any of my predecessors in Jerusalem.
ECC 2:8 I also amassed silver and gold for myself, as well as valuable treasures taken from kingdoms and provinces. I acquired male singers and female singers for myself, and what gives a man sensual delight – a harem of beautiful concubines!
ECC 2:9 So I was far wealthier than all my predecessors in Jerusalem, yet I maintained my objectivity:
ECC 2:10 I did not restrain myself from getting whatever I wanted; I did not deny myself anything that would bring me pleasure. So all my accomplishments gave me joy; this was my reward for all my effort.
ECC 2:11 Yet when I reflected on everything I had accomplished and on all the effort that I had expended to accomplish it, I concluded: “All these achievements and possessions are ultimately profitless – like chasing the wind! There is nothing gained from them on earth.”
ECC 2:12 Next, I decided to consider wisdom, as well as foolish behavior and ideas. For what more can the king’s successor do than what the king has already done?
ECC 2:13 I realized that wisdom is preferable to folly, just as light is preferable to darkness:
ECC 2:14 The wise man can see where he is going, but the fool walks in darkness. Yet I also realized that the same fate happens to them both.
ECC 2:15 So I thought to myself, “The fate of the fool will happen even to me! Then what did I gain by becoming so excessively wise?” So I lamented to myself, “The benefits of wisdom are ultimately meaningless!”
ECC 2:16 For the wise man, like the fool, will not be remembered for very long, because in the days to come, both will already have been forgotten. Alas, the wise man dies – just like the fool!
ECC 2:17 So I loathed life because what happens on earth seems awful to me; for all the benefits of wisdom are futile – like chasing the wind.
ECC 2:18 So I loathed all the fruit of my effort, for which I worked so hard on earth, because I must leave it behind in the hands of my successor.
ECC 2:19 Who knows if he will be a wise man or a fool? Yet he will be master over all the fruit of my labor for which I worked so wisely on earth! This also is futile!
ECC 2:20 So I began to despair about all the fruit of my labor for which I worked so hard on earth.
ECC 2:21 For a man may do his work with wisdom, knowledge, and skill; however, he must hand over the fruit of his labor as an inheritance to someone else who did not work for it. This also is futile, and an awful injustice!
ECC 2:22 What does a man acquire from all his labor and from the anxiety that accompanies his toil on earth?
ECC 2:23 For all day long his work produces pain and frustration, and even at night his mind cannot relax! This also is futile!
ECC 2:24 There is nothing better for people than to eat and drink, and to find enjoyment in their work. I also perceived that this ability to find enjoyment comes from God.
ECC 2:25 For no one can eat and drink or experience joy apart from him.
ECC 2:26 For to the one who pleases him, God gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy, but to the sinner, he gives the task of amassing wealth – only to give it to the one who pleases God. This task of the wicked is futile – like chasing the wind!
ECC 3:1 For everything there is an appointed time, and an appropriate time for every activity on earth:
ECC 3:2 A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to uproot what was planted;
ECC 3:3 A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;
ECC 3:4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance.
ECC 3:5 A time to throw away stones, and a time to gather stones; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
ECC 3:6 A time to search, and a time to give something up as lost; a time to keep, and a time to throw away;
ECC 3:7 A time to rip, and a time to sew; a time to keep silent, and a time to speak.
ECC 3:8 A time to love, and a time to hate; a time for war, and a time for peace.
ECC 3:9 What benefit can a worker gain from his toil?
ECC 3:10 I have observed the burden that God has given to people to keep them occupied.
ECC 3:11 God has made everything fit beautifully in its appropriate time, but he has also placed ignorance in the human heart so that people cannot discover what God has ordained, from the beginning to the end of their lives.
ECC 3:12 I have concluded that there is nothing better for people than to be happy and to enjoy themselves as long as they live,
ECC 3:13 and also that everyone should eat and drink, and find enjoyment in all his toil, for these things are a gift from God.
ECC 3:14 I also know that whatever God does will endure forever; nothing can be added to it, and nothing taken away from it. God has made it this way, so that men will fear him.
ECC 3:15 Whatever exists now has already been, and whatever will be has already been; for God will seek to do again what has occurred in the past.
ECC 3:16 I saw something else on earth: In the place of justice, there was wickedness, and in the place of fairness, there was wickedness.
ECC 3:17 I thought to myself, “God will judge both the righteous and the wicked; for there is an appropriate time for every activity, and there is a time of judgment for every deed.
ECC 3:18 I also thought to myself, “It is for the sake of people, so God can clearly show them that they are like animals.
ECC 3:19 For the fate of humans and the fate of animals are the same: As one dies, so dies the other; both have the same breath. There is no advantage for humans over animals, for both are fleeting.
ECC 3:20 Both go to the same place, both come from the dust, and to dust both return.
ECC 3:21 Who really knows if the human spirit ascends upward, and the animal’s spirit descends into the earth?
ECC 3:22 So I perceived there is nothing better than for people to enjoy their work, because that is their reward; for who can show them what the future holds?
ECC 4:1 So I again considered all the oppression that continually occurs on earth. This is what I saw: The oppressed were in tears, but no one was comforting them; no one delivers them from the power of their oppressors.
ECC 4:2 So I considered those who are dead and gone more fortunate than those who are still alive.
ECC 4:3 But better than both is the one who has not been born and has not seen the evil things that are done on earth.
ECC 4:4 Then I considered all the skillful work that is done: Surely it is nothing more than competition between one person and another. This also is profitless – like chasing the wind.
ECC 4:5 The fool folds his hands and does no work, so he has nothing to eat but his own flesh.
ECC 4:6 Better is one handful with some rest than two hands full of toil and chasing the wind.
ECC 4:7 So I again considered another futile thing on earth:
ECC 4:8 A man who is all alone with no companion, he has no children nor siblings; yet there is no end to all his toil, and he is never satisfied with riches. He laments, “For whom am I toiling and depriving myself of pleasure?” This also is futile and a burdensome task!
ECC 4:9 Two people are better than one, because they can reap more benefit from their labor.
ECC 4:10 For if they fall, one will help his companion up, but pity the person who falls down and has no one to help him up.
ECC 4:11 Furthermore, if two lie down together, they can keep each other warm, but how can one person keep warm by himself?
ECC 4:12 Although an assailant may overpower one person, two can withstand him. Moreover, a three-stranded cord is not quickly broken.
ECC 4:13 A poor but wise youth is better than an old and foolish king who no longer knows how to receive advice.
ECC 4:14 For he came out of prison to become king, even though he had been born poor in what would become his kingdom.
ECC 4:15 I considered all the living who walk on earth, as well as the successor who would arise in his place.
ECC 4:16 There is no end to all the people nor to the past generations, yet future generations will not rejoice in him. This also is profitless and like chasing the wind.
ECC 5:1 Be careful what you do when you go to the temple of God; draw near to listen rather than to offer a sacrifice like fools, for they do not realize that they are doing wrong.
ECC 5:2 Do not be rash with your mouth or hasty in your heart to bring up a matter before God, for God is in heaven and you are on earth! Therefore, let your words be few.
ECC 5:3 Just as dreams come when there are many cares, so the rash vow of a fool occurs when there are many words.
ECC 5:4 When you make a vow to God, do not delay in paying it. For God takes no pleasure in fools: Pay what you vow!
ECC 5:5 It is better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay it.
ECC 5:6 Do not let your mouth cause you to sin, and do not tell the priest, “It was a mistake!” Why make God angry at you so that he would destroy the work of your hands?”
ECC 5:7 Just as there is futility in many dreams, so also in many words. Therefore, fear God!
ECC 5:8 If you see the extortion of the poor, or the perversion of justice and fairness in the government, do not be astonished by the matter. For the high official is watched by a higher official, and there are higher ones over them!
ECC 5:9 The produce of the land is seized by all of them, even the king is served by the fields.
ECC 5:10 The one who loves money will never be satisfied with money, he who loves wealth will never be satisfied with his income. This also is futile.
ECC 5:11 When someone’s prosperity increases, those who consume it also increase; so what does its owner gain, except that he gets to see it with his eyes?
ECC 5:12 The sleep of the laborer is pleasant – whether he eats little or much – but the wealth of the rich will not allow him to sleep.
ECC 5:13 Here is a misfortune on earth that I have seen: Wealth hoarded by its owner to his own misery.
ECC 5:14 Then that wealth was lost through bad luck; although he fathered a son, he has nothing left to give him.
ECC 5:15 Just as he came forth from his mother's womb, naked will he return as he came, and he will take nothing in his hand that he may carry away from his toil.
ECC 5:16 This is another misfortune: Just as he came, so will he go. What did he gain from toiling for the wind?
ECC 5:17 Surely, he ate in darkness every day of his life, and he suffered greatly with sickness and anger.
ECC 5:18 I have seen personally what is the only beneficial and appropriate course of action for people: to eat and drink, and find enjoyment in all their hard work on earth during the few days of their life which God has given them, for this is their reward.
ECC 5:19 To every man whom God has given wealth, and possessions, he has also given him the ability to eat from them, to receive his reward and to find enjoyment in his toil; these things are the gift of God.
ECC 5:20 For he does not think much about the fleeting days of his life because God keeps him preoccupied with the joy he derives from his activity.
ECC 6:1 Here is another misfortune that I have seen on earth, and it weighs heavily on people:
ECC 6:2 God gives a man riches, property, and wealth so that he lacks nothing that his heart desires, yet God does not enable him to enjoy the fruit of his labor – instead, someone else enjoys it! This is fruitless and a grave misfortune.
ECC 6:3 Even if a man fathers a hundred children and lives many years – even if he lives a long, long time, but cannot enjoy his prosperity – even if he were to live forever – I would say, “A stillborn child is better off than he is!”
ECC 6:4 Though the stillborn child came into the world for no reason and departed into darkness, though its name is shrouded in darkness,
ECC 6:5 though it never saw the light of day nor knew anything, yet it has more rest than that man –
ECC 6:6 if he should live a thousand years twice, yet does not enjoy his prosperity. For both of them die!
ECC 6:7 All of man’s labor is for nothing more than to fill his stomach – yet his appetite is never satisfied!
ECC 6:8 So what advantage does a wise man have over a fool? And what advantage does a pauper gain by knowing how to survive?
ECC 6:9 It is better to be content with what the eyes can see than for one’s heart always to crave more. This continual longing is futile – like chasing the wind.
ECC 6:10 Whatever has happened was foreordained, and what happens to a person was also foreknown. It is useless for him to argue with God about his fate because God is more powerful than he is.
ECC 6:11 The more one argues with words, the less he accomplishes. How does that benefit him?
ECC 6:12 For no one knows what is best for a person during his life – during the few days of his fleeting life – for they pass away like a shadow. Nor can anyone tell him what the future will hold for him on earth.
ECC 7:1 A good reputation is better than precious perfume; likewise, the day of one’s death is better than the day of one’s birth.
ECC 7:2 It is better to go to a funeral than a feast. For death is the destiny of every person, and the living should take this to heart.
ECC 7:3 Sorrow is better than laughter, because sober reflection is good for the heart.
ECC 7:4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of merrymaking.
ECC 7:5 It is better for a person to receive a rebuke from those who are wise than to listen to the song of fools.
ECC 7:6 For like the crackling of quick-burning thorns under a cooking pot, so is the laughter of the fool. This kind of folly also is useless.
ECC 7:7 Surely oppression can turn a wise person into a fool; likewise, a bribe corrupts the heart.
ECC 7:8 The end of a matter is better than its beginning; likewise, patience is better than pride.
ECC 7:9 Do not let yourself be quickly provoked, for anger resides in the lap of fools.
ECC 7:10 Do not say, “Why were the old days better than these days?” for it is not wise to ask that.
ECC 7:11 Wisdom, like an inheritance, is a good thing; it benefits those who see the light of day.
ECC 7:12 For wisdom provides protection, just as money provides protection. But the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.
ECC 7:13 Consider the work of God: For who can make straight what he has bent?
ECC 7:14 In times of prosperity be joyful, but in times of adversity consider this: God has made one as well as the other, so that no one can discover what the future holds.
ECC 7:15 During the days of my fleeting life I have seen both of these things: Sometimes a righteous person dies prematurely in spite of his righteousness, and sometimes a wicked person lives long in spite of his evil deeds.
ECC 7:16 So do not be excessively righteous or excessively wise; otherwise you might be disappointed.
ECC 7:17 Do not be excessively wicked and do not be a fool; otherwise you might die before your time.
ECC 7:18 It is best to take hold of one warning without letting go of the other warning; for the one who fears God will follow both warnings.
ECC 7:19 Wisdom gives a wise person more protection than ten rulers in a city.
ECC 7:20 For there is not one truly righteous person on the earth who continually does good and never sins.
ECC 7:21 Also, do not pay attention to everything that people say; otherwise, you might even hear your servant cursing you.
ECC 7:22 For you know in your own heart that you also have cursed others many times.
ECC 7:23 I have examined all this by wisdom; I said, “I am determined to comprehend this” – but it was beyond my grasp.
ECC 7:24 Whatever has happened is beyond human understanding; it is far deeper than anyone can fathom.
ECC 7:25 I tried to understand, examine, and comprehend the role of wisdom in the scheme of things, and to understand the stupidity of wickedness and the insanity of folly.
ECC 7:26 I discovered this: More bitter than death is the kind of woman who is like a hunter’s snare; her heart is like a hunter’s net and her hands are like prison chains. The man who pleases God escapes her, but the sinner is captured by her.
ECC 7:27 The Teacher says: I discovered this while trying to discover the scheme of things, item by item.
ECC 7:28 What I have continually sought, I have not found; I have found only one upright man among a thousand, but I have not found one upright woman among all of them.
ECC 7:29 This alone have I discovered: God made humankind upright, but they have sought many evil schemes.
ECC 8:1 Who is a wise person? Who knows the solution to a problem? A person’s wisdom brightens his appearance, and softens his harsh countenance.
ECC 8:2 Obey the king’s command, because you took an oath before God to be loyal to him.
ECC 8:3 Do not rush out of the king’s presence in haste – do not delay when the matter is unpleasant, for he can do whatever he pleases.
ECC 8:4 Surely the king’s authority is absolute; no one can say to him, “What are you doing?”
ECC 8:5 Whoever obeys his command will not experience harm, and a wise person knows the proper time and procedure.
ECC 8:6 For there is a proper time and procedure for every matter, for the oppression of the king is severe upon his victim.
ECC 8:7 Surely no one knows the future, and no one can tell another person what will happen.
ECC 8:8 Just as no one has power over the wind to restrain it, so no one has power over the day of his death. Just as no one can be discharged during the battle, so wickedness cannot rescue the wicked.
ECC 8:9 While applying my mind to everything that happens in this world, I have seen all this: Sometimes one person dominates other people to their harm.
ECC 8:10 Not only that, but I have seen the wicked approaching and entering the temple, and as they left the holy temple, they boasted in the city that they had done so. This also is an enigma.
ECC 8:11 When a sentence is not executed at once against a crime, the human heart is encouraged to do evil.
ECC 8:12 Even though a sinner might commit a hundred crimes and still live a long time, yet I know that it will go well with God-fearing people – for they stand in fear before him.
ECC 8:13 But it will not go well with the wicked, nor will they prolong their days like a shadow, because they do not stand in fear before God.
ECC 8:14 Here is another enigma that occurs on earth: Sometimes there are righteous people who get what the wicked deserve, and sometimes there are wicked people who get what the righteous deserve. I said, “This also is an enigma.”
ECC 8:15 So I recommend the enjoyment of life, for there is nothing better on earth for a person to do except to eat, drink, and enjoy life. So joy will accompany him in his toil during the days of his life which God gives him on earth.
ECC 8:16 When I tried to gain wisdom and to observe the activity on earth – even though it prevents anyone from sleeping day or night –
ECC 8:17 then I discerned all that God has done: No one really comprehends what happens on earth. Despite all human efforts to discover it, no one can ever grasp it. Even if a wise person claimed that he understood, he would not really comprehend it.
ECC 9:1 So I reflected on all this, attempting to clear it all up. I concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their works, are in the hand of God; whether a person will be loved or hated – no one knows what lies ahead.
ECC 9:2 Everyone shares the same fate – the righteous and the wicked, the good and the bad, the ceremonially clean and unclean, those who offer sacrifices and those who do not. What happens to the good person, also happens to the sinner; what happens to those who make vows, also happens to those who are afraid to make vows.
ECC 9:3 This is the unfortunate fact about everything that happens on earth: the same fate awaits everyone. In addition to this, the hearts of all people are full of evil, and there is folly in their hearts during their lives – then they die.
ECC 9:4 But whoever is among the living has hope; a live dog is better than a dead lion.
ECC 9:5 For the living know that they will die, but the dead do not know anything; they have no further reward – and even the memory of them disappears.
ECC 9:6 What they loved, as well as what they hated and envied, perished long ago, and they no longer have a part in anything that happens on earth.
ECC 9:7 Go, eat your food with joy, and drink your wine with a happy heart, because God has already approved your works.
ECC 9:8 Let your clothes always be white, and do not spare precious ointment on your head.
ECC 9:9 Enjoy life with your beloved wife during all the days of your fleeting life that God has given you on earth during all your fleeting days; for that is your reward in life and in your burdensome work on earth.
ECC 9:10 Whatever you find to do with your hands, do it with all your might, because there is neither work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave, the place where you will eventually go.
ECC 9:11 Again, I observed this on the earth: the race is not always won by the swiftest, the battle is not always won by the strongest; prosperity does not always belong to those who are the wisest, wealth does not always belong to those who are the most discerning, nor does success always come to those with the most knowledge – for time and chance may overcome them all.
ECC 9:12 Surely, no one knows his appointed time! Like fish that are caught in a deadly net, and like birds that are caught in a snare – just like them, all people are ensnared at an unfortunate time that falls upon them suddenly.
ECC 9:13 This is what I also observed about wisdom on earth, and it is a great burden to me:
ECC 9:14 There was once a small city with a few men in it, and a mighty king attacked it, besieging it and building strong siege works against it.
ECC 9:15 However, a poor but wise man lived in the city, and he could have delivered the city by his wisdom, but no one listened to that poor man.
ECC 9:16 So I concluded that wisdom is better than might, but a poor man’s wisdom is despised; no one ever listens to his advice.
ECC 9:17 The words of the wise are heard in quiet, more than the shouting of a ruler is heard among fools.
ECC 9:18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but one sinner can destroy much that is good.
ECC 10:1 One dead fly makes the perfumer’s ointment give off a rancid stench, so a little folly can outweigh much wisdom.
ECC 10:2 A wise person’s good sense protects him, but a fool’s lack of sense leaves him vulnerable.
ECC 10:3 Even when a fool walks along the road he lacks sense, and shows everyone what a fool he is.
ECC 10:4 If the anger of the ruler flares up against you, do not resign from your position, for a calm response can undo great offenses.
ECC 10:5 I have seen another misfortune on the earth: It is an error a ruler makes.
ECC 10:6 Fools are placed in many positions of authority, while wealthy men sit in lowly positions.
ECC 10:7 I have seen slaves on horseback and princes walking on foot like slaves.
ECC 10:8 One who digs a pit may fall into it, and one who breaks through a wall may be bitten by a snake.
ECC 10:9 One who quarries stones may be injured by them; one who splits logs may be endangered by them.
ECC 10:10 If an iron axhead is blunt and a workman does not sharpen its edge, he must exert a great deal of effort; so wisdom has the advantage of giving success.
ECC 10:11 If the snake should bite before it is charmed, the snake charmer is in trouble.
ECC 10:12 The words of a wise person win him favor, but the words of a fool are self-destructive.
ECC 10:13 At the beginning his words are foolish and at the end his talk is wicked madness,
ECC 10:14 yet a fool keeps on babbling. No one knows what will happen; who can tell him what will happen in the future?
ECC 10:15 The toil of a stupid fool wears him out, because he does not even know the way to the city.
ECC 10:16 Woe to you, O land, when your king is childish, and your princes feast in the morning!
ECC 10:17 Blessed are you, O land, when your king is the son of nobility, and your princes feast at the proper time – with self-control and not in drunkenness.
ECC 10:18 Because of laziness the roof caves in, and because of idle hands the house leaks.
ECC 10:19 Feasts are made for laughter, and wine makes life merry, but money is the answer for everything.
ECC 10:20 Do not curse a king even in your thoughts, and do not curse the rich while in your bedroom; for a bird might report what you are thinking, or some winged creature might repeat your words.
ECC 11:1 Send your grain overseas, for after many days you will get a return.
ECC 11:2 Divide your merchandise among seven or even eight investments, for you do not know what calamity may happen on earth.
ECC 11:3 If the clouds are full of rain, they will empty themselves on the earth, and whether a tree falls to the south or to the north, the tree will lie wherever it falls.
ECC 11:4 He who watches the wind will not sow, and he who observes the clouds will not reap.
ECC 11:5 Just as you do not know the path of the wind, or how the bones form in the womb of a pregnant woman, so you do not know the work of God who makes everything.
ECC 11:6 Sow your seed in the morning, and do not stop working until the evening; for you do not know which activity will succeed – whether this one or that one, or whether both will prosper equally.
ECC 11:7 Light is sweet, and it is pleasant for a person to see the sun.
ECC 11:8 So, if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in them all, but let him remember that the days of darkness will be many – all that is about to come is obscure.
ECC 11:9 Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth. Follow the impulses of your heart and the desires of your eyes, but know that God will judge your motives and actions.
ECC 11:10 Banish emotional stress from your mind. and put away pain from your body; for youth and the prime of life are fleeting.
ECC 12:1 So remember your Creator in the days of your youth – before the difficult days come, and the years draw near when you will say, “I have no pleasure in them”;
ECC 12:2 before the sun and the light of the moon and the stars grow dark, and the clouds disappear after the rain;
ECC 12:3 when those who keep watch over the house begin to tremble, and the virile men begin to stoop over, and the grinders begin to cease because they grow few, and those who look through the windows grow dim,
ECC 12:4 and the doors along the street are shut; when the sound of the grinding mill grows low, and one is awakened by the sound of a bird, and all their songs grow faint,
ECC 12:5 and they are afraid of heights and the dangers in the street; the almond blossoms grow white, and the grasshopper drags itself along, and the caper berry shrivels up – because man goes to his eternal home, and the mourners go about in the streets –
ECC 12:6 before the silver cord is removed, or the golden bowl is broken, or the pitcher is shattered at the well, or the water wheel is broken at the cistern –
ECC 12:7 and the dust returns to the earth as it was, and the life’s breath returns to God who gave it.
ECC 12:8 “Absolutely futile!” laments the Teacher, “All of these things are futile!”
ECC 12:9 Not only was the Teacher wise, but he also taught knowledge to the people; he carefully evaluated and arranged many proverbs.
ECC 12:10 The Teacher sought to find delightful words, and to write accurately truthful sayings.
ECC 12:11 The words of the sages are like prods, and the collected sayings are like firmly fixed nails; they are given by one shepherd.
ECC 12:12 Be warned, my son, of anything in addition to them. There is no end to the making of many books, and much study is exhausting to the body.
ECC 12:13 Having heard everything, I have reached this conclusion: Fear God and keep his commandments, because this is the whole duty of man.
ECC 12:14 For God will evaluate every deed, including every secret thing, whether good or evil.
SOL 1:1 Solomon’s Most Excellent Love Song.
SOL 1:2 Oh, how I wish you would kiss me passionately! For your lovemaking is more delightful than wine.
SOL 1:3 The fragrance of your colognes is delightful; your name is like the finest perfume. No wonder the young women adore you!
SOL 1:4 Draw me after you; let us hurry! May the king bring me into his bedroom chambers! We will rejoice and delight in you; we will praise your love more than wine. The Beloved to Her Lover: How rightly the young women adore you!
SOL 1:5 I am dark but lovely, O maidens of Jerusalem, dark like the tents of Qedar, lovely like the tent curtains of Salmah.
SOL 1:6 Do not stare at me because I am dark, for the sun has burned my skin. My brothers were angry with me; they made me the keeper of the vineyards. Alas, my own vineyard I could not keep!
SOL 1:7 Tell me, O you whom my heart loves, where do you pasture your sheep? Where do you rest your sheep during the midday heat? Tell me lest I wander around beside the flocks of your companions!
SOL 1:8 If you do not know, O most beautiful of women, simply follow the tracks of my flock, and pasture your little lambs beside the tents of the shepherds.
SOL 1:9 O my beloved, you are like a mare among Pharaoh’s stallions.
SOL 1:10 Your cheeks are beautiful with ornaments; your neck is lovely with strings of jewels.
SOL 1:11 We will make for you gold ornaments studded with silver.
SOL 1:12 While the king was at his banqueting table, my nard gave forth its fragrance.
SOL 1:13 My beloved is like a fragrant pouch of myrrh spending the night between my breasts.
SOL 1:14 My beloved is like a cluster of henna blossoms in the vineyards of En-Gedi.
SOL 1:15 Oh, how beautiful you are, my beloved! Oh, how beautiful you are! Your eyes are like doves!
SOL 1:16 Oh, how handsome you are, my lover! Oh, how delightful you are! The lush foliage is our canopied bed;
SOL 1:17 the cedars are the beams of our bedroom chamber; the pines are the rafters of our bedroom.
SOL 2:1 I am a meadow flower from Sharon, a lily from the valleys.
SOL 2:2 Like a lily among the thorns, so is my darling among the maidens.
SOL 2:3 Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest, so is my beloved among the young men. I delight to sit in his shade, and his fruit is sweet to my taste.
SOL 2:4 He brought me into the banquet hall, and he looked at me lovingly.
SOL 2:5 Sustain me with raisin cakes, refresh me with apples, for I am faint with love. The Double Refrain: Embracing and Adjuration
SOL 2:6 His left hand caresses my head, and his right hand stimulates me.
SOL 2:7 I adjure you, O maidens of Jerusalem, by the gazelles and by the young does of the open fields: Do not awaken or arouse love until it pleases!
SOL 2:8 Listen! My lover is approaching! Look! Here he comes, leaping over the mountains, bounding over the hills!
SOL 2:9 My lover is like a gazelle or a young stag. Look! There he stands behind our wall, gazing through the window, peering through the lattice.
SOL 2:10 My lover spoke to me, saying: “Arise, my darling; My beautiful one, come away with me!
SOL 2:11 Look! The winter has passed, the winter rains are over and gone.
SOL 2:12 The pomegranates have appeared in the land, the time for pruning and singing has come; the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land.
SOL 2:13 The fig tree has budded, the vines have blossomed and give off their fragrance. Arise, come away my darling; my beautiful one, come away with me!”
SOL 2:14 O my dove, in the clefts of the rock, in the hiding places of the mountain crags, let me see your face, let me hear your voice; for your voice is sweet, and your face is lovely.
SOL 2:15 Catch the foxes for us, the little foxes, that ruin the vineyards – for our vineyard is in bloom.
SOL 2:16 My lover is mine and I am his; he grazes among the lilies.
SOL 2:17 Until the dawn arrives and the shadows flee, turn, my beloved – be like a gazelle or a young stag on the mountain gorges.
SOL 3:1 All night long on my bed I longed for my lover. I longed for him but he never appeared.
SOL 3:2 “I will arise and look all around throughout the town, and throughout the streets and squares; I will search for my beloved.” I searched for him but I did not find him.
SOL 3:3 The night watchmen found me – the ones who guard the city walls. “Have you seen my beloved?”
SOL 3:4 Scarcely had I passed them by when I found my beloved! I held onto him tightly and would not let him go until I brought him to my mother’s house, to the bedroom chamber of the one who conceived me.
SOL 3:5 I admonish you, O maidens of Jerusalem, by the gazelles and by the young does of the open fields: “Do not awake or arouse love until it pleases!”
SOL 3:6 Who is this coming up from the desert like a column of smoke, like a fragrant billow of myrrh and frankincense, every kind of fragrant powder of the traveling merchants?
SOL 3:7 Look! It is Solomon’s portable couch! It is surrounded by sixty warriors, some of Israel’s mightiest warriors.
SOL 3:8 All of them are skilled with a sword, well-trained in the art of warfare. Each has his sword at his side, to guard against the terrors of the night.
SOL 3:9 King Solomon made a sedan chair for himself of wood imported from Lebanon.
SOL 3:10 Its posts were made of silver; its back was made of gold. Its seat was upholstered with purple wool; its interior was inlaid with leather by the maidens of Jerusalem.
SOL 3:11 Come out, O maidens of Zion, and gaze upon King Solomon! He is wearing the crown with which his mother crowned him on his wedding day, on the most joyous day of his life!
SOL 4:1 Oh, you are beautiful, my darling! Oh, you are beautiful! Your eyes behind your veil are like doves. Your hair is like a flock of female goats descending from Mount Gilead.
SOL 4:2 Your teeth are like a flock of newly-shorn sheep coming up from the washing place; each of them has a twin, and not one of them is missing.
SOL 4:3 Your lips are like a scarlet thread; your mouth is lovely. Your forehead behind your veil is like a slice of pomegranate.
SOL 4:4 Your neck is like the tower of David built with courses of stones; one thousand shields are hung on it – all shields of valiant warriors.
SOL 4:5 Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of the gazelle grazing among the lilies.
SOL 4:6 Until the dawn arrives and the shadows flee, I will go up to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
SOL 4:7 You are altogether beautiful, my darling! There is no blemish in you!
SOL 4:8 Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, come with me from Lebanon. Descend from the crest of Amana, from the top of Senir, the summit of Hermon, from the lions’ dens and the mountain haunts of the leopards.
SOL 4:9 You have stolen my heart, my sister, my bride! You have stolen my heart with one glance of your eyes, with one jewel of your necklace.
SOL 4:10 How delightful is your love, my sister, my bride! How much better is your love than wine; the fragrance of your perfume is better than any spice!
SOL 4:11 Your lips drip sweetness like the honeycomb, my bride, honey and milk are under your tongue. The fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebanon.
SOL 4:12 You are a locked garden, my sister, my bride; you are an enclosed spring, a sealed-up fountain.
SOL 4:13 Your shoots are a royal garden full of pomegranates with choice fruits: henna with nard,
SOL 4:14 nard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon with every kind of spice, myrrh and aloes with all the finest spices.
SOL 4:15 You are a garden spring, a well of fresh water flowing down from Lebanon.
SOL 4:16 Awake, O north wind; come, O south wind! Blow on my garden so that its fragrant spices may send out their sweet smell. May my beloved come into his garden and eat its delightful fruit!
SOL 5:1 I have entered my garden, O my sister, my bride; I have gathered my myrrh with my balsam spice. I have eaten my honeycomb and my honey; I have drunk my wine and my milk! Eat, friends, and drink! Drink freely, O lovers!
SOL 5:2 I was asleep, but my mind was dreaming. Listen! My lover is knocking at the door! “Open for me, my sister, my darling, my dove, my flawless one! My head is drenched with dew, my hair with the dampness of the night.”
SOL 5:3 “I have already taken off my robe – must I put it on again? I have already washed my feet – must I soil them again?”
SOL 5:4 My lover thrust his hand through the hole, and my feelings were stirred for him.
SOL 5:5 I arose to open for my beloved; my hands dripped with myrrh – my fingers flowed with myrrh on the handles of the lock.
SOL 5:6 I opened for my beloved, but my lover had already turned and gone away. I fell into despair when he departed. I looked for him but did not find him; I called him but he did not answer me.
SOL 5:7 The watchmen found me as they made their rounds in the city. They beat me, they bruised me; they took away my cloak, those watchmen on the walls!
SOL 5:8 O maidens of Jerusalem, I command you – If you find my beloved, what will you tell him? Tell him that I am lovesick!
SOL 5:9 Why is your beloved better than others, O most beautiful of women? Why is your beloved better than others, that you would command us in this manner?
SOL 5:10 My beloved is dazzling and ruddy; he stands out in comparison to all other men.
SOL 5:11 His head is like the most pure gold. His hair is curly – black like a raven.
SOL 5:12 His eyes are like doves by streams of water, washed in milk, mounted like jewels.
SOL 5:13 His cheeks are like garden beds full of balsam trees yielding perfume. His lips are like lilies dripping with drops of myrrh.
SOL 5:14 His arms are like rods of gold set with chrysolite. His abdomen is like polished ivory inlaid with sapphires.
SOL 5:15 His legs are like pillars of marble set on bases of pure gold. His appearance is like Lebanon, choice as its cedars.
SOL 5:16 His mouth is very sweet; he is totally desirable. This is my beloved! This is my companion, O maidens of Jerusalem!
SOL 6:1 Where has your beloved gone, O most beautiful among women? Where has your beloved turned? Tell us, that we may seek him with you.
SOL 6:2 My beloved has gone down to his garden, to the flowerbeds of balsam spices, to graze in the gardens, and to gather lilies.
SOL 6:3 I am my lover’s and my lover is mine; he grazes among the lilies.
SOL 6:4 My darling, you are as beautiful as Tirzah, as lovely as Jerusalem, as awe-inspiring as bannered armies!
SOL 6:5 Turn your eyes away from me – they overwhelm me! Your hair is like a flock of goats descending from Mount Gilead.
SOL 6:6 Your teeth are like a flock of sheep coming up from the washing; each has its twin; not one of them is missing.
SOL 6:7 Like a slice of pomegranate is your forehead behind your veil.
SOL 6:8 There may be sixty queens, and eighty concubines, and young women without number.
SOL 6:9 But she is unique! My dove, my perfect one! She is the special daughter of her mother, she is the favorite of the one who bore her. The maidens saw her and complimented her; the queens and concubines praised her:
SOL 6:10 “Who is this who appears like the dawn? Beautiful as the moon, bright as the sun, awe-inspiring as the stars in procession?”
SOL 6:11 I went down to the orchard of walnut trees, to look for the blossoms of the valley, to see if the vines had budded or if the pomegranates were in bloom.
SOL 6:12 I was beside myself with joy! There please give me your myrrh, O daughter of my princely people.
SOL 6:13 Turn , turn, O Perfect One! Turn, turn, that I may stare at you! Why do you gaze upon the Perfect One like the dance of the Mahanaim?
SOL 7:1 How beautiful are your sandaled feet, O nobleman’s daughter! The curves of your thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a master craftsman.
SOL 7:2 Your navel is a round mixing bowl – may it never lack mixed wine! Your belly is a mound of wheat, encircled by lilies.
SOL 7:3 Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle.
SOL 7:4 Your neck is like a tower made of ivory. Your eyes are the pools in Heshbon by the gate of Bath-Rabbim. Your nose is like the tower of Lebanon overlooking Damascus.
SOL 7:5 Your head crowns you like Mount Carmel. The locks of your hair are like royal tapestries – the king is held captive in its tresses!
SOL 7:6 How beautiful you are! How lovely, O love, with your delights!
SOL 7:7 Your stature is like a palm tree, and your breasts are like clusters of grapes.
SOL 7:8 I want to climb the palm tree, and take hold of its fruit stalks. May your breasts be like the clusters of grapes, and may the fragrance of your breath be like apricots!
SOL 7:9 May your mouth be like the best wine, flowing smoothly for my beloved, gliding gently over our lips as we sleep together.
SOL 7:10 I am my beloved’s, and he desires me!
SOL 7:11 Come, my beloved, let us go to the countryside; let us spend the night in the villages.
SOL 7:12 Let us rise early to go to the vineyards, to see if the vines have budded, to see if their blossoms have opened, if the pomegranates are in bloom – there I will give you my love.
SOL 7:13 The mandrakes send out their fragrance; over our door is every delicacy, both new and old, which I have stored up for you, my lover.
SOL 8:1 Oh, how I wish you were my little brother, nursing at my mother’s breasts; if I saw you outside, I could kiss you – surely no one would despise me!
SOL 8:2 I would lead you and bring you to my mother’s house, the one who taught me. I would give you spiced wine to drink, the nectar of my pomegranates.
SOL 8:3 His left hand caresses my head, and his right hand stimulates me.
SOL 8:4 I admonish you, O maidens of Jerusalem: “Do not arouse or awaken love until it pleases!”
SOL 8:5 Who is this coming up from the desert, leaning on her beloved? Under the apple tree I aroused you; there your mother conceived you, there she who bore you was in labor of childbirth.
SOL 8:6 Set me like a cylinder seal over your heart, like a signet on your arm. For love is as strong as death, passion is as unrelenting as Sheol. Its flames burst forth, it is a blazing flame.
SOL 8:7 Surging waters cannot quench love; floodwaters cannot overflow it. If someone were to offer all his possessions to buy love, the offer would be utterly despised.
SOL 8:8 We have a little sister, and as yet she has no breasts. What shall we do for our sister on the day when she is spoken for?
SOL 8:9 If she is a wall, we will build on her a battlement of silver; but if she is a door, we will barricade her with boards of cedar.
SOL 8:10 I was a wall, and my breasts were like fortress towers. Then I found favor in his eyes.
SOL 8:11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-Hamon; he leased out the vineyard to those who maintained it. Each was to bring a thousand shekels of silver for its fruit.
SOL 8:12 My vineyard, which belongs to me, is at my disposal alone. The thousand shekels belong to you, O Solomon, and two hundred shekels belong to those who maintain it for its fruit.
SOL 8:13 O you who stay in the gardens, my companions are listening attentively for your voice; let me be the one to hear it!
SOL 8:14 Make haste, my beloved! Be like a gazelle or a young stag on the mountains of spices.
ISA 1:1 Here is the message about Judah and Jerusalem that was revealed to Isaiah son of Amoz during the time when Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah reigned over Judah.
ISA 1:2 Listen, O heavens, pay attention, O earth! For the Lord speaks: “I raised children, I brought them up, but they have rebelled against me!
ISA 1:3 An ox recognizes its owner, a donkey recognizes where its owner puts its food; but Israel does not recognize me, my people do not understand.”
ISA 1:4 The sinful nation is as good as dead, the people weighed down by evil deeds. They are offspring who do wrong, children who do wicked things. They have abandoned the Lord, and rejected the Holy One of Israel. They are alienated from him.
ISA 1:5 Why do you insist on being battered? Why do you continue to rebel? Your head has a massive wound, your whole body is weak.
ISA 1:6 From the soles of your feet to your head, there is no spot that is unharmed. There are only bruises, cuts, and open wounds. They have not been cleansed or bandaged, nor have they been treated with olive oil.
ISA 1:7 Your land is devastated, your cities burned with fire. Right before your eyes your crops are being destroyed by foreign invaders. They leave behind devastation and destruction.
ISA 1:8 Daughter Zion is left isolated, like a hut in a vineyard, or a shelter in a cucumber field; she is a besieged city.
ISA 1:9 If the Lord who commands armies had not left us a few survivors, we would have quickly become like Sodom, we would have become like Gomorrah.
ISA 1:10 Listen to the Lord’s word, you leaders of Sodom! Pay attention to our God’s rebuke, people of Gomorrah!
ISA 1:11 “Of what importance to me are your many sacrifices?” says the Lord. “I am stuffed with burnt sacrifices of rams and the fat from steers. The blood of bulls, lambs, and goats I do not want.
ISA 1:12 When you enter my presence, do you actually think I want this – animals trampling on my courtyards?
ISA 1:13 Do not bring any more meaningless offerings; I consider your incense detestable! You observe new moon festivals, Sabbaths, and convocations, but I cannot tolerate sin-stained celebrations!
ISA 1:14 I hate your new moon festivals and assemblies; they are a burden that I am tired of carrying.
ISA 1:15 When you spread out your hands in prayer, I look the other way; when you offer your many prayers, I do not listen, because your hands are covered with blood.
ISA 1:16 Wash! Cleanse yourselves! Remove your sinful deeds from my sight. Stop sinning!
ISA 1:17 Learn to do what is right! Promote justice! Give the oppressed reason to celebrate! Take up the cause of the orphan! Defend the rights of the widow!
ISA 1:18 Come, let’s consider your options,” says the Lord. “Though your sins have stained you like the color red, you can become white like snow; though they are as easy to see as the color scarlet, you can become white like wool.
ISA 1:19 If you have a willing attitude and obey, then you will again eat the good crops of the land.
ISA 1:20 But if you refuse and rebel, you will be devoured by the sword.” Know for certain that the Lord has spoken.
ISA 1:21 How tragic that the once-faithful city has become a prostitute! She was once a center of justice, fairness resided in her, but now only murderers.
ISA 1:22 Your silver has become scum, your beer is diluted with water.
ISA 1:23 Your officials are rebels, they associate with thieves. All of them love bribery, and look for payoffs. They do not take up the cause of the orphan, or defend the rights of the widow.
ISA 1:24 Therefore, the sovereign Lord who commands armies, the powerful ruler of Israel, says this: “Ah, I will seek vengeance against my adversaries, I will take revenge against my enemies.
ISA 1:25 I will attack you; I will purify your metal with flux. I will remove all your slag.
ISA 1:26 I will reestablish honest judges as in former times, wise advisers as in earlier days. Then you will be called, ‘The Just City, Faithful Town.’”
ISA 1:27 Zion will be freed by justice, and her returnees by righteousness.
ISA 1:28 All rebellious sinners will be shattered, those who abandon the Lord will perish.
ISA 1:29 Indeed, they will be ashamed of the sacred trees you find so desirable; you will be embarrassed because of the sacred orchards where you choose to worship.
ISA 1:30 For you will be like a tree whose leaves wither, like an orchard that is unwatered.
ISA 1:31 The powerful will be like a thread of yarn, their deeds like a spark; both will burn together, and no one will put out the fire.
ISA 2:1 Here is the message about Judah and Jerusalem that was revealed to Isaiah son of Amoz.
ISA 2:2 In the future the mountain of the Lord’s temple will endure as the most important of mountains, and will be the most prominent of hills. All the nations will stream to it,
ISA 2:3 many peoples will come and say, “Come, let us go up to the Lord’s mountain, to the temple of the God of Jacob, so he can teach us his requirements, and we can follow his standards.” For Zion will be the center for moral instruction; the Lord will issue edicts from Jerusalem.
ISA 2:4 He will judge disputes between nations; he will settle cases for many peoples. They will beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nations will not take up the sword against other nations, and they will no longer train for war.
ISA 2:5 O descendants of Jacob, come, let us walk in the Lord’s guiding light.
ISA 2:6 Indeed, O Lord, you have abandoned your people, the descendants of Jacob. For diviners from the east are everywhere; they consult omen readers like the Philistines do. Plenty of foreigners are around.
ISA 2:7 Their land is full of gold and silver; there is no end to their wealth. Their land is full of horses; there is no end to their chariots.
ISA 2:8 Their land is full of worthless idols; they worship the product of their own hands, what their own fingers have fashioned.
ISA 2:9 Men bow down to them in homage, they lie flat on the ground in worship. Don’t spare them!
ISA 2:10 Go up into the rocky cliffs, hide in the ground. Get away from the dreadful judgment of the Lord, from his royal splendor!
ISA 2:11 Proud men will be brought low, arrogant men will be humiliated; the Lord alone will be exalted in that day.
ISA 2:12 Indeed, the Lord who commands armies has planned a day of judgment, for all the high and mighty, for all who are proud – they will be humiliated;
ISA 2:13 for all the cedars of Lebanon, that are so high and mighty, for all the oaks of Bashan;
ISA 2:14 for all the tall mountains, for all the high hills,
ISA 2:15 for every high tower, for every fortified wall,
ISA 2:16 for all the large ships, for all the impressive ships.
ISA 2:17 Proud men will be humiliated, arrogant men will be brought low; the Lord alone will be exalted in that day.
ISA 2:18 The worthless idols will be completely eliminated.
ISA 2:19 They will go into caves in the rocky cliffs and into holes in the ground, trying to escape the dreadful judgment of the Lord and his royal splendor, when he rises up to terrify the earth.
ISA 2:20 At that time men will throw their silver and gold idols, which they made for themselves to worship, into the caves where rodents and bats live,
ISA 2:21 so they themselves can go into the crevices of the rocky cliffs and the openings under the rocky overhangs, trying to escape the dreadful judgment of the Lord and his royal splendor, when he rises up to terrify the earth.
ISA 2:22 Stop trusting in human beings, whose life’s breath is in their nostrils. For why should they be given special consideration?
ISA 3:1 Look, the sovereign Lord who commands armies is about to remove from Jerusalem and Judah every source of security, including all the food and water,
ISA 3:2 the mighty men and warriors, judges and prophets, omen readers and leaders,
ISA 3:3 captains of groups of fifty, the respected citizens, advisers and those skilled in magical arts, and those who know incantations.
ISA 3:4 The Lord says, “I will make youths their officials; malicious young men will rule over them.
ISA 3:5 The people will treat each other harshly; men will oppose each other; neighbors will fight. Youths will proudly defy the elderly and riffraff will challenge those who were once respected.
ISA 3:6 Indeed, a man will grab his brother right in his father’s house and say, ‘You own a coat – you be our leader! This heap of ruins will be under your control.’
ISA 3:7 At that time the brother will shout, ‘I am no doctor, I have no food or coat in my house; don’t make me a leader of the people!’”
ISA 3:8 Jerusalem certainly stumbles, Judah falls, for their words and their actions offend the Lord; they rebel against his royal authority.
ISA 3:9 The look on their faces testifies to their guilt; like the people of Sodom they openly boast of their sin. Too bad for them! For they bring disaster on themselves.
ISA 3:10 Tell the innocent it will go well with them, for they will be rewarded for what they have done.
ISA 3:11 Too bad for the wicked sinners! For they will get exactly what they deserve.
ISA 3:12 Oppressors treat my people cruelly; creditors rule over them. My people’s leaders mislead them; they give you confusing directions.
ISA 3:13 The Lord takes his position to judge; he stands up to pass sentence on his people.
ISA 3:14 The Lord comes to pronounce judgment on the leaders of his people and their officials. He says, “It is you who have ruined the vineyard! You have stashed in your houses what you have stolen from the poor.
ISA 3:15 Why do you crush my people and grind the faces of the poor?” The sovereign Lord who commands armies has spoken.
ISA 3:16 The Lord says, “The women of Zion are proud. They walk with their heads high and flirt with their eyes. They skip along and the jewelry on their ankles jingles.
ISA 3:17 So the sovereign master will afflict the foreheads of Zion’s women with skin diseases, the Lord will make the front of their heads bald.”
ISA 3:18 At that time the sovereign master will remove their beautiful ankle jewelry, neck ornaments, crescent shaped ornaments,
ISA 3:19 earrings, bracelets, veils,
ISA 3:20 headdresses, ankle ornaments, sashes, sachets, amulets,
ISA 3:21 rings, nose rings,
ISA 3:22 festive dresses, robes, shawls, purses,
ISA 3:23 garments, vests, head coverings, and gowns.
ISA 3:24 A putrid stench will replace the smell of spices, a rope will replace a belt, baldness will replace braided locks of hair, a sackcloth garment will replace a fine robe, and a prisoner’s brand will replace beauty.
ISA 3:25 Your men will fall by the sword, your strong men will die in battle.
ISA 3:26 Her gates will mourn and lament; deprived of her people, she will sit on the ground.
ISA 4:1 Seven women will grab hold of one man at that time. They will say, “We will provide our own food, we will provide our own clothes; but let us belong to you – take away our shame!”
ISA 4:2 At that time the crops given by the Lord will bring admiration and honor; the produce of the land will be a source of pride and delight to those who remain in Israel.
ISA 4:3 Those remaining in Zion, those left in Jerusalem, will be called “holy,” all in Jerusalem who are destined to live.
ISA 4:4 At that time the sovereign master will wash the excrement from Zion’s women, he will rinse the bloodstains from Jerusalem’s midst, as he comes to judge and to bring devastation.
ISA 4:5 Then the Lord will create over all of Mount Zion and over its convocations a cloud and smoke by day and a bright flame of fire by night; indeed a canopy will accompany the Lord’s glorious presence.
ISA 4:6 By day it will be a shelter to provide shade from the heat, as well as safety and protection from the heavy downpour.
ISA 5:1 I will sing to my love – a song to my lover about his vineyard. My love had a vineyard on a fertile hill.
ISA 5:2 He built a hedge around it, removed its stones, and planted a vine. He built a tower in the middle of it, and constructed a winepress. He waited for it to produce edible grapes, but it produced sour ones instead.
ISA 5:3 So now, residents of Jerusalem, people of Judah, you decide between me and my vineyard!
ISA 5:4 What more can I do for my vineyard beyond what I have already done? When I waited for it to produce edible grapes, why did it produce sour ones instead?
ISA 5:5 Now I will inform you what I am about to do to my vineyard: I will remove its hedge and turn it into pasture, I will break its wall and allow animals to graze there.
ISA 5:6 I will make it a wasteland; no one will prune its vines or hoe its ground, and thorns and briers will grow there. I will order the clouds not to drop any rain on it.
ISA 5:7 Indeed Israel is the vineyard of the Lord who commands armies, the people of Judah are the cultivated place in which he took delight. He waited for justice, but look what he got – disobedience! He waited for fairness, but look what he got – cries for help!
ISA 5:8 Those who accumulate houses are as good as dead, those who also accumulate landed property until there is no land left, and you are the only landowners remaining within the land.
ISA 5:9 The Lord who commands armies told me this: “Many houses will certainly become desolate, large, impressive houses will have no one living in them.
ISA 5:10 Indeed, a large vineyard will produce just a few gallons, and enough seed to yield several bushels will produce less than a bushel.”
ISA 5:11 Those who get up early to drink beer are as good as dead, those who keep drinking long after dark until they are intoxicated with wine.
ISA 5:12 They have stringed instruments, tambourines, flutes, and wine at their parties. So they do not recognize what the Lord is doing, they do not perceive what he is bringing about.
ISA 5:13 Therefore my people will be deported because of their lack of understanding. Their leaders will have nothing to eat, their masses will have nothing to drink.
ISA 5:14 So Death will open up its throat, and open wide its mouth; Zion’s dignitaries and masses will descend into it, including those who revel and celebrate within her.
ISA 5:15 Men will be humiliated, they will be brought low; the proud will be brought low.
ISA 5:16 The Lord who commands armies will be exalted when he punishes, the sovereign God’s authority will be recognized when he judges.
ISA 5:17 Lambs will graze as if in their pastures, amid the ruins the rich sojourners will graze.
ISA 5:18 Those who pull evil along using cords of emptiness are as good as dead, who pull sin as with cart ropes.
ISA 5:19 They say, “Let him hurry, let him act quickly, so we can see; let the plan of the Holy One of Israel take shape and come to pass, then we will know it!”
ISA 5:20 Those who call evil good and good evil are as good as dead, who turn darkness into light and light into darkness, who turn bitter into sweet and sweet into bitter.
ISA 5:21 Those who think they are wise are as good as dead, those who think they possess understanding.
ISA 5:22 Those who are champions at drinking wine are as good as dead, who display great courage when mixing strong drinks.
ISA 5:23 They pronounce the guilty innocent for a payoff, they ignore the just cause of the innocent.
ISA 5:24 Therefore, as flaming fire devours straw, and dry grass disintegrates in the flames, so their root will rot, and their flower will blow away like dust. For they have rejected the law of the Lord who commands armies, they have spurned the commands of the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 5:25 So the Lord is furious with his people; he lifts his hand and strikes them. The mountains shake, and corpses lie like manure in the middle of the streets. Despite all this, his anger does not subside, and his hand is ready to strike again.
ISA 5:26 He lifts a signal flag for a distant nation, he whistles for it to come from the far regions of the earth. Look, they come quickly and swiftly.
ISA 5:27 None tire or stumble, they don’t stop to nap or sleep. They don’t loosen their belts, or unstrap their sandals to rest.
ISA 5:28 Their arrows are sharpened, and all their bows are prepared. The hooves of their horses are hard as flint, and their chariot wheels are like a windstorm.
ISA 5:29 Their roar is like a lion’s; they roar like young lions. They growl and seize their prey; they drag it away and no one can come to the rescue.
ISA 5:30 At that time they will growl over their prey, it will sound like sea waves crashing against rocks. One will look out over the land and see the darkness of disaster, clouds will turn the light into darkness.
ISA 6:1 In the year of King Uzziah’s death, I saw the sovereign master seated on a high, elevated throne. The hem of his robe filled the temple.
ISA 6:2 Seraphs stood over him; each one had six wings. With two wings they covered their faces, with two they covered their feet, and they used the remaining two to fly.
ISA 6:3 They called out to one another, “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord who commands armies! His majestic splendor fills the entire earth!”
ISA 6:4 The sound of their voices shook the door frames, and the temple was filled with smoke.
ISA 6:5 I said, “Too bad for me! I am destroyed, for my lips are contaminated by sin, and I live among people whose lips are contaminated by sin. My eyes have seen the king, the Lord who commands armies.”
ISA 6:6 But then one of the seraphs flew toward me. In his hand was a hot coal he had taken from the altar with tongs.
ISA 6:7 He touched my mouth with it and said, “Look, this coal has touched your lips. Your evil is removed; your sin is forgiven.”
ISA 6:8 I heard the voice of the sovereign master say, “Whom will I send? Who will go on our behalf?” I answered, “Here I am, send me!”
ISA 6:9 He said, “Go and tell these people: ‘Listen continually, but don’t understand! Look continually, but don’t perceive!’
ISA 6:10 Make the hearts of these people calloused; make their ears deaf and their eyes blind! Otherwise they might see with their eyes and hear with their ears, their hearts might understand and they might repent and be healed.”
ISA 6:11 I replied, “How long, sovereign master?” He said, “Until cities are in ruins and unpopulated, and houses are uninhabited, and the land is ruined and devastated,
ISA 6:12 and the Lord has sent the people off to a distant place, and the very heart of the land is completely abandoned.
ISA 6:13 Even if only a tenth of the people remain in the land, it will again be destroyed, like one of the large sacred trees or an Asherah pole, when a sacred pillar on a high place is thrown down. That sacred pillar symbolizes the special chosen family.”
ISA 7:1 During the reign of Ahaz son of Jotham, son of Uzziah, king of Judah, King Rezin of Syria and King Pekah son of Remaliah of Israel marched up to Jerusalem to do battle, but they were unable to prevail against it.
ISA 7:2 It was reported to the family of David, “Syria has allied with Ephraim.” They and their people were emotionally shaken, just as the trees of the forest shake before the wind.
ISA 7:3 So the Lord told Isaiah, “Go out with your son Shear-jashub and meet Ahaz at the end of the conduit of the upper pool which is located on the road to the field where they wash and dry cloth.
ISA 7:4 Tell him, ‘Make sure you stay calm! Don’t be afraid! Don’t be intimidated by these two stubs of smoking logs, or by the raging anger of Rezin, Syria, and the son of Remaliah.
ISA 7:5 Syria has plotted with Ephraim and the son of Remaliah to bring about your demise.
ISA 7:6 They say, “Let’s attack Judah, terrorize it, and conquer it. Then we’ll set up the son of Tabeel as its king.”
ISA 7:7 For this reason the sovereign master, the Lord, says: “It will not take place; it will not happen.
ISA 7:8 For Syria’s leader is Damascus, and the leader of Damascus is Rezin. Within sixty-five years Ephraim will no longer exist as a nation.
ISA 7:9 Ephraim’s leader is Samaria, and Samaria’s leader is the son of Remaliah. If your faith does not remain firm, then you will not remain secure.”
ISA 7:10 The Lord again spoke to Ahaz:
ISA 7:11 “Ask for a confirming sign from the Lord your God. You can even ask for something miraculous.”
ISA 7:12 But Ahaz responded, “I don’t want to ask; I don’t want to put the Lord to a test.”
ISA 7:13 So Isaiah replied, “Pay attention, family of David. Do you consider it too insignificant to try the patience of men? Is that why you are also trying the patience of my God?
ISA 7:14 For this reason the sovereign master himself will give you a confirming sign. Look, this young woman is about to conceive and will give birth to a son. You, young woman, will name him Immanuel.
ISA 7:15 He will eat sour milk and honey, which will help him know how to reject evil and choose what is right.
ISA 7:16 Here is why this will be so: Before the child knows how to reject evil and choose what is right, the land whose two kings you fear will be desolate.
ISA 7:17 The Lord will bring on you, your people, and your father’s family a time unlike any since Ephraim departed from Judah – the king of Assyria!”
ISA 7:18 At that time the Lord will whistle for flies from the distant streams of Egypt and for bees from the land of Assyria.
ISA 7:19 All of them will come and make their home in the ravines between the cliffs, and in the crevices of the cliffs, in all the thorn bushes, and in all the watering holes.
ISA 7:20 At that time the sovereign master will use a razor hired from the banks of the Euphrates River, the king of Assyria, to shave the head and the pubic hair; it will also shave off the beard.
ISA 7:21 At that time a man will keep alive a young cow from the herd and a couple of goats.
ISA 7:22 From the abundance of milk they produce, he will have sour milk for his meals. Indeed, everyone left in the heart of the land will eat sour milk and honey.
ISA 7:23 At that time every place where there had been a thousand vines worth a thousand shekels will be overrun with thorns and briers.
ISA 7:24 With bow and arrow men will hunt there, for the whole land will be covered with thorns and briers.
ISA 7:25 They will stay away from all the hills that were cultivated, for fear of the thorns and briers. Cattle will graze there and sheep will trample on them.
ISA 8:1 The Lord told me, “Take a large tablet and inscribe these words on it with an ordinary stylus: ‘Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz.’
ISA 8:2 Then I will summon as my reliable witnesses Uriah the priest and Zechariah son of Jeberekiah.”
ISA 8:3 I then had sexual relations with the prophetess; she conceived and gave birth to a son. The Lord told me, “Name him Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz,
ISA 8:4 for before the child knows how to cry out, ‘My father’ or ‘My mother,’ the wealth of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria will be carried off by the king of Assyria.”
ISA 8:5 The Lord spoke to me again:
ISA 8:6 “These people have rejected the gently flowing waters of Shiloah and melt in fear over Rezin and the son of Remaliah.
ISA 8:7 So look, the sovereign master is bringing up against them the turbulent and mighty waters of the Euphrates River – the king of Assyria and all his majestic power. It will reach flood stage and overflow its banks.
ISA 8:8 It will spill into Judah, flooding and engulfing, as it reaches to the necks of its victims. He will spread his wings out over your entire land, O Immanuel.”
ISA 8:9 You will be broken, O nations; you will be shattered! Pay attention, all you distant lands of the earth! Get ready for battle, and you will be shattered! Get ready for battle, and you will be shattered!
ISA 8:10 Devise your strategy, but it will be thwarted! Issue your orders, but they will not be executed! For God is with us!
ISA 8:11 Indeed this is what the Lord told me. He took hold of me firmly and warned me not to act like these people:
ISA 8:12 “Do not say, ‘Conspiracy,’ every time these people say the word. Don’t be afraid of what scares them; don’t be terrified.
ISA 8:13 You must recognize the authority of the Lord who commands armies. He is the one you must respect; he is the one you must fear.
ISA 8:14 He will become a sanctuary, but a stone that makes a person trip, and a rock that makes one stumble – to the two houses of Israel. He will become a trap and a snare to the residents of Jerusalem.
ISA 8:15 Many will stumble over the stone and the rock, and will fall and be seriously injured, and will be ensnared and captured.”
ISA 8:16 Tie up the scroll as legal evidence, seal the official record of God’s instructions and give it to my followers.
ISA 8:17 I will wait patiently for the Lord, who has rejected the family of Jacob; I will wait for him.
ISA 8:18 Look, I and the sons whom the Lord has given me are reminders and object lessons in Israel, sent from the Lord who commands armies, who lives on Mount Zion.
ISA 8:19 They will say to you, “Seek oracles at the pits used to conjure up underworld spirits, from the magicians who chirp and mutter incantations. Should people not seek oracles from their gods, by asking the dead about the destiny of the living?”
ISA 8:20 Then you must recall the Lord’s instructions and the prophetic testimony of what would happen. Certainly they say such things because their minds are spiritually darkened.
ISA 8:21 They will pass through the land destitute and starving. Their hunger will make them angry, and they will curse their king and their God as they look upward.
ISA 8:22 When one looks out over the land, he sees distress and darkness, gloom and anxiety, darkness and people forced from the land.
ISA 9:1 The gloom will be dispelled for those who were anxious. In earlier times he humiliated the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali; but now he brings honor to the way of the sea, the region beyond the Jordan, and Galilee of the nations.
ISA 9:2 The people walking in darkness see a bright light; light shines on those who live in a land of deep darkness.
ISA 9:3 You have enlarged the nation; you give them great joy. They rejoice in your presence as harvesters rejoice; as warriors celebrate when they divide up the plunder.
ISA 9:4 For their oppressive yoke and the club that strikes their shoulders, the cudgel the oppressor uses on them, you have shattered, as in the day of Midian’s defeat.
ISA 9:5 Indeed every boot that marches and shakes the earth and every garment dragged through blood is used as fuel for the fire.
ISA 9:6 For a child has been born to us, a son has been given to us. He shoulders responsibility and is called: Extraordinary Strategist, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
ISA 9:7 His dominion will be vast and he will bring immeasurable prosperity. He will rule on David’s throne and over David’s kingdom, establishing it and strengthening it by promoting justice and fairness, from this time forward and forevermore. The Lord’s intense devotion to his people will accomplish this.
ISA 9:8 The sovereign master decreed judgment on Jacob, and it fell on Israel.
ISA 9:9 All the people were aware of it, the people of Ephraim and those living in Samaria. Yet with pride and an arrogant attitude, they said,
ISA 9:10 “The bricks have fallen, but we will rebuild with chiseled stone; the sycamore fig trees have been cut down, but we will replace them with cedars.”
ISA 9:11 Then the Lord provoked their adversaries to attack them, he stirred up their enemies –
ISA 9:12 Syria from the east, and the Philistines from the west, they gobbled up Israelite territory. Despite all this, his anger does not subside, and his hand is ready to strike again.
ISA 9:13 The people did not return to the one who struck them, they did not seek reconciliation with the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 9:14 So the Lord cut off Israel’s head and tail, both the shoots and stalk in one day.
ISA 9:15 The leaders and the highly respected people are the head, the prophets who teach lies are the tail.
ISA 9:16 The leaders of this nation were misleading people, and the people being led were destroyed.
ISA 9:17 So the sovereign master was not pleased with their young men, he took no pity on their orphans and widows; for the whole nation was godless and did wicked things, every mouth was speaking disgraceful words. Despite all this, his anger does not subside, and his hand is ready to strike again.
ISA 9:18 For evil burned like a fire, it consumed thorns and briers; it burned up the thickets of the forest, and they went up in smoke.
ISA 9:19 Because of the anger of the Lord who commands armies, the land was scorched, and the people became fuel for the fire. People had no compassion on one another.
ISA 9:20 They devoured on the right, but were still hungry, they ate on the left, but were not satisfied. People even ate the flesh of their own arm!
ISA 9:21 Manasseh fought against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh; together they fought against Judah. Despite all this, his anger does not subside, and his hand is ready to strike again.
ISA 10:1 Those who enact unjust policies are as good as dead, those who are always instituting unfair regulations,
ISA 10:2 to keep the poor from getting fair treatment, and to deprive the oppressed among my people of justice, so they can steal what widows own, and loot what belongs to orphans.
ISA 10:3 What will you do on judgment day, when destruction arrives from a distant place? To whom will you run for help? Where will you leave your wealth?
ISA 10:4 You will have no place to go, except to kneel with the prisoners, or to fall among those who have been killed. Despite all this, his anger does not subside, and his hand is ready to strike again.
ISA 10:5 Assyria, the club I use to vent my anger, is as good as dead, a cudgel with which I angrily punish.
ISA 10:6 I sent him against a godless nation, I ordered him to attack the people with whom I was angry, to take plunder and to carry away loot, to trample them down like dirt in the streets.
ISA 10:7 But he does not agree with this, his mind does not reason this way, for his goal is to destroy, and to eliminate many nations.
ISA 10:8 Indeed, he says: “Are not my officials all kings?
ISA 10:9 Is not Calneh like Carchemish? Hamath like Arpad? Samaria like Damascus?
ISA 10:10 I overpowered kingdoms ruled by idols, whose carved images were more impressive than Jerusalem’s or Samaria’s.
ISA 10:11 As I have done to Samaria and its idols, so I will do to Jerusalem and its idols.”
ISA 10:12 But when the sovereign master finishes judging Mount Zion and Jerusalem, then I will punish the king of Assyria for what he has proudly planned and for the arrogant attitude he displays.
ISA 10:13 For he says: “By my strong hand I have accomplished this, by my strategy that I devised. I invaded the territory of nations, and looted their storehouses. Like a mighty conqueror, I brought down rulers.
ISA 10:14 My hand discovered the wealth of the nations, as if it were in a nest, as one gathers up abandoned eggs, I gathered up the whole earth. There was no wing flapping, or open mouth chirping.”
ISA 10:15 Does an ax exalt itself over the one who wields it, or a saw magnify itself over the one who cuts with it? As if a scepter should brandish the one who raises it, or a staff should lift up what is not made of wood!
ISA 10:16 For this reason the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, will make his healthy ones emaciated. His majestic glory will go up in smoke.
ISA 10:17 The light of Israel will become a fire, their Holy One will become a flame; it will burn and consume the Assyrian king’s briers and his thorns in one day.
ISA 10:18 The splendor of his forest and his orchard will be completely destroyed, as when a sick man’s life ebbs away.
ISA 10:19 There will be so few trees left in his forest, a child will be able to count them.
ISA 10:20 At that time those left in Israel, those who remain of the family of Jacob, will no longer rely on a foreign leader that abuses them. Instead they will truly rely on the Lord, the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 10:21 A remnant will come back, a remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God.
ISA 10:22 For though your people, Israel, are as numerous as the sand on the seashore, only a remnant will come back. Destruction has been decreed; just punishment is about to engulf you.
ISA 10:23 The sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, is certainly ready to carry out the decreed destruction throughout the land.
ISA 10:24 So here is what the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, says: “My people who live in Zion, do not be afraid of Assyria, even though they beat you with a club and lift their cudgel against you as Egypt did.
ISA 10:25 For very soon my fury will subside, and my anger will be directed toward their destruction.”
ISA 10:26 The Lord who commands armies is about to beat them with a whip, similar to the way he struck down Midian at the rock of Oreb. He will use his staff against the sea, lifting it up as he did in Egypt.
ISA 10:27 At that time the Lord will remove their burden from your shoulders, and their yoke from your neck; the yoke will be taken off because your neck will be too large.
ISA 10:28 They attacked Aiath, moved through Migron, depositing their supplies at Micmash.
ISA 10:29 They went through the pass, spent the night at Geba. Ramah trembled, Gibeah of Saul ran away.
ISA 10:30 Shout out, daughter of Gallim! Pay attention, Laishah! Answer her, Anathoth!
ISA 10:31 Madmenah flees, the residents of Gebim have hidden.
ISA 10:32 This very day, standing in Nob, they shake their fist at Daughter Zion’s mountain – at the hill of Jerusalem.
ISA 10:33 Look, the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, is ready to cut off the branches with terrifying power. The tallest trees will be cut down, the loftiest ones will be brought low.
ISA 10:34 The thickets of the forest will be chopped down with an ax, and mighty Lebanon will fall.
ISA 11:1 A shoot will grow out of Jesse’s root stock, a bud will sprout from his roots.
ISA 11:2 The Lord’s spirit will rest on him – a spirit that gives extraordinary wisdom, a spirit that provides the ability to execute plans, a spirit that produces absolute loyalty to the Lord.
ISA 11:3 He will take delight in obeying the Lord. He will not judge by mere appearances, or make decisions on the basis of hearsay.
ISA 11:4 He will treat the poor fairly, and make right decisions for the downtrodden of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and order the wicked to be executed.
ISA 11:5 Justice will be like a belt around his waist, integrity will be like a belt around his hips.
ISA 11:6 A wolf will reside with a lamb, and a leopard will lie down with a young goat; an ox and a young lion will graze together, as a small child leads them along.
ISA 11:7 A cow and a bear will graze together, their young will lie down together. A lion, like an ox, will eat straw.
ISA 11:8 A baby will play over the hole of a snake; over the nest of a serpent an infant will put his hand.
ISA 11:9 They will no longer injure or destroy on my entire royal mountain. For there will be universal submission to the Lord’s sovereignty, just as the waters completely cover the sea.
ISA 11:10 At that time a root from Jesse will stand like a signal flag for the nations. Nations will look to him for guidance, and his residence will be majestic.
ISA 11:11 At that time the sovereign master will again lift his hand to reclaim the remnant of his people from Assyria, Egypt, Pathros, Cush, Elam, Shinar, Hamath, and the seacoasts.
ISA 11:12 He will lift a signal flag for the nations; he will gather Israel’s dispersed people and assemble Judah’s scattered people from the four corners of the earth.
ISA 11:13 Ephraim’s jealousy will end, and Judah’s hostility will be eliminated. Ephraim will no longer be jealous of Judah, and Judah will no longer be hostile toward Ephraim.
ISA 11:14 They will swoop down on the Philistine hills to the west; together they will loot the people of the east. They will take over Edom and Moab, and the Ammonites will be their subjects.
ISA 11:15 The Lord will divide the gulf of the Egyptian Sea; he will wave his hand over the Euphrates River and send a strong wind, he will turn it into seven dried-up streams, and enable them to walk across in their sandals.
ISA 11:16 There will be a highway leading out of Assyria for the remnant of his people, just as there was for Israel, when they went up from the land of Egypt.
ISA 12:1 At that time you will say: “I praise you, O Lord, for even though you were angry with me, your anger subsided, and you consoled me.
ISA 12:2 Look, God is my deliverer! I will trust in him and not fear. For the Lord gives me strength and protects me; he has become my deliverer.”
ISA 12:3 Joyfully you will draw water from the springs of deliverance.
ISA 12:4 At that time you will say: “Praise the Lord! Ask him for help! Publicize his mighty acts among the nations! Make it known that he is unique!
ISA 12:5 Sing to the Lord, for he has done magnificent things, let this be known throughout the earth!
ISA 12:6 Cry out and shout for joy, O citizens of Zion, for the Holy One of Israel acts mightily among you!”
ISA 13:1 This is a message about Babylon that God revealed to Isaiah son of Amoz:
ISA 13:2 On a bare hill raise a signal flag, shout to them, wave your hand, so they might enter the gates of the princes!
ISA 13:3 I have given orders to my chosen soldiers; I have summoned the warriors through whom I will vent my anger, my boasting, arrogant ones.
ISA 13:4 There is a loud noise on the mountains – it sounds like a large army! There is great commotion among the kingdoms – nations are being assembled! The Lord who commands armies is mustering forces for battle.
ISA 13:5 They come from a distant land, from the horizon. It is the Lord with his instruments of judgment, coming to destroy the whole earth.
ISA 13:6 Wail, for the Lord’s day of judgment is near; it comes with all the destructive power of the sovereign judge.
ISA 13:7 For this reason all hands hang limp, every human heart loses its courage.
ISA 13:8 They panic – cramps and pain seize hold of them like those of a woman who is straining to give birth. They look at one another in astonishment; their faces are flushed red.
ISA 13:9 Look, the Lord’s day of judgment is coming; it is a day of cruelty and savage, raging anger, destroying the earth and annihilating its sinners.
ISA 13:10 Indeed the stars in the sky and their constellations no longer give out their light; the sun is darkened as soon as it rises, and the moon does not shine.
ISA 13:11 I will punish the world for its evil, and wicked people for their sin. I will put an end to the pride of the insolent, I will bring down the arrogance of tyrants.
ISA 13:12 I will make human beings more scarce than pure gold, and people more scarce than gold from Ophir.
ISA 13:13 So I will shake the heavens, and the earth will shake loose from its foundation, because of the fury of the Lord who commands armies, in the day he vents his raging anger.
ISA 13:14 Like a frightened gazelle or a sheep with no shepherd, each will turn toward home, each will run to his homeland.
ISA 13:15 Everyone who is caught will be stabbed; everyone who is seized will die by the sword.
ISA 13:16 Their children will be smashed to pieces before their very eyes; their houses will be looted and their wives raped.
ISA 13:17 Look, I am stirring up the Medes to attack them; they are not concerned about silver, nor are they interested in gold.
ISA 13:18 Their arrows will cut young men to ribbons; they have no compassion on a person’s offspring, they will not look with pity on children.
ISA 13:19 Babylon, the most admired of kingdoms, the Chaldeans’ source of honor and pride, will be destroyed by God just as Sodom and Gomorrah were.
ISA 13:20 No one will live there again; no one will ever reside there again. No bedouin will camp there, no shepherds will rest their flocks there.
ISA 13:21 Wild animals will rest there, the ruined houses will be full of hyenas. Ostriches will live there, wild goats will skip among the ruins.
ISA 13:22 Wild dogs will yip in her ruined fortresses, jackals will yelp in the once-splendid palaces. Her time is almost up, her days will not be prolonged.
ISA 14:1 The Lord will certainly have compassion on Jacob; he will again choose Israel as his special people and restore them to their land. Resident foreigners will join them and unite with the family of Jacob.
ISA 14:2 Nations will take them and bring them back to their own place. Then the family of Jacob will make foreigners their servants as they settle in the Lord’s land. They will make their captors captives and rule over the ones who oppressed them.
ISA 14:3 When the Lord gives you relief from your suffering and anxiety, and from the hard labor which you were made to perform,
ISA 14:4 you will taunt the king of Babylon with these words: “Look how the oppressor has met his end! Hostility has ceased!
ISA 14:5 The Lord has broken the club of the wicked, the scepter of rulers.
ISA 14:6 It furiously struck down nations with unceasing blows. It angrily ruled over nations, oppressing them without restraint.
ISA 14:7 The whole earth rests and is quiet; they break into song.
ISA 14:8 The evergreens also rejoice over your demise, as do the cedars of Lebanon, singing, ‘Since you fell asleep, no woodsman comes up to chop us down!’
ISA 14:9 Sheol below is stirred up about you, ready to meet you when you arrive. It rouses the spirits of the dead for you, all the former leaders of the earth; it makes all the former kings of the nations rise from their thrones.
ISA 14:10 All of them respond to you, saying: ‘You too have become weak like us! You have become just like us!
ISA 14:11 Your splendor has been brought down to Sheol, as well as the sound of your stringed instruments. You lie on a bed of maggots, with a blanket of worms over you.
ISA 14:12 Look how you have fallen from the sky, O shining one, son of the dawn! You have been cut down to the ground, O conqueror of the nations!
ISA 14:13 You said to yourself, “I will climb up to the sky. Above the stars of El I will set up my throne. I will rule on the mountain of assembly on the remote slopes of Zaphon.
ISA 14:14 I will climb up to the tops of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High!”
ISA 14:15 But you were brought down to Sheol, to the remote slopes of the pit.
ISA 14:16 Those who see you stare at you, they look at you carefully, thinking: “Is this the man who shook the earth, the one who made kingdoms tremble?
ISA 14:17 Is this the one who made the world like a desert, who ruined its cities, and refused to free his prisoners so they could return home?”’
ISA 14:18 As for all the kings of the nations, all of them lie down in splendor, each in his own tomb.
ISA 14:19 But you have been thrown out of your grave like a shoot that is thrown away. You lie among the slain, among those who have been slashed by the sword, among those headed for the stones of the pit, as if you were a mangled corpse.
ISA 14:20 You will not be buried with them, because you destroyed your land and killed your people. The offspring of the wicked will never be mentioned again.
ISA 14:21 Prepare to execute his sons for the sins their ancestors have committed. They must not rise up and take possession of the earth, or fill the surface of the world with cities.”
ISA 14:22 “I will rise up against them,” says the Lord who commands armies. “I will blot out all remembrance of Babylon and destroy all her people, including the offspring she produces,” says the Lord.
ISA 14:23 “I will turn her into a place that is overrun with wild animals and covered with pools of stagnant water. I will get rid of her, just as one sweeps away dirt with a broom,” says the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 14:24 The Lord who commands armies makes this solemn vow: “Be sure of this: Just as I have intended, so it will be; just as I have planned, it will happen.
ISA 14:25 I will break Assyria in my land, I will trample them underfoot on my hills. Their yoke will be removed from my people, the burden will be lifted from their shoulders.
ISA 14:26 This is the plan I have devised for the whole earth; my hand is ready to strike all the nations.”
ISA 14:27 Indeed, the Lord who commands armies has a plan, and who can possibly frustrate it? His hand is ready to strike, and who can possibly stop it?
ISA 14:28 In the year King Ahaz died, this message was revealed:
ISA 14:29 Don’t be so happy, all you Philistines, just because the club that beat you has been broken! For a viper will grow out of the serpent’s root, and its fruit will be a darting adder.
ISA 14:30 The poor will graze in my pastures; the needy will rest securely. But I will kill your root by famine; it will put to death all your survivors.
ISA 14:31 Wail, O city gate! Cry out, O city! Melt with fear, all you Philistines! For out of the north comes a cloud of smoke, and there are no stragglers in its ranks.
ISA 14:32 How will they respond to the messengers of this nation? Indeed, the Lord has made Zion secure; the oppressed among his people will find safety in her.
ISA 15:1 Here is a message about Moab: Indeed, in a night it is devastated, Ar of Moab is destroyed! Indeed, in a night it is devastated, Kir of Moab is destroyed!
ISA 15:2 They went up to the temple, the people of Dibon went up to the high places to lament. Because of what happened to Nebo and Medeba, Moab wails. Every head is shaved bare, every beard is trimmed off.
ISA 15:3 In their streets they wear sackcloth; on their roofs and in their town squares all of them wail, they fall down weeping.
ISA 15:4 The people of Heshbon and Elealeh cry out, their voices are heard as far away as Jahaz. For this reason Moab’s soldiers shout in distress; their courage wavers.
ISA 15:5 My heart cries out because of Moab’s plight, and for the fugitives stretched out as far as Zoar and Eglath Shelishiyah. For they weep as they make their way up the ascent of Luhith; they loudly lament their demise on the road to Horonaim.
ISA 15:6 For the waters of Nimrim are gone; the grass is dried up, the vegetation has disappeared, and there are no plants.
ISA 15:7 For this reason what they have made and stored up, they carry over the Stream of the Poplars.
ISA 15:8 Indeed, the cries of distress echo throughout Moabite territory; their wailing can be heard in Eglaim and Beer Elim.
ISA 15:9 Indeed, the waters of Dimon are full of blood! Indeed, I will heap even more trouble on Dimon. A lion will attack the Moabite fugitives and the people left in the land.
ISA 16:1 Send rams as tribute to the ruler of the land, from Sela in the desert to the hill of Daughter Zion.
ISA 16:2 At the fords of the Arnon the Moabite women are like a bird that flies about when forced from its nest.
ISA 16:3 “Bring a plan, make a decision! Provide some shade in the middle of the day! Hide the fugitives! Do not betray the one who tries to escape!
ISA 16:4 Please let the Moabite fugitives live among you. Hide them from the destroyer!” Certainly the one who applies pressure will cease, the destroyer will come to an end, those who trample will disappear from the earth.
ISA 16:5 Then a trustworthy king will be established; he will rule in a reliable manner, this one from David’s family. He will be sure to make just decisions and will be experienced in executing justice.
ISA 16:6 We have heard about Moab’s pride, their great arrogance, their boasting, pride, and excess. But their boastful claims are empty!
ISA 16:7 So Moab wails over its demise – they all wail! Completely devastated, they moan about what has happened to the raisin cakes of Kir Hareseth.
ISA 16:8 For the fields of Heshbon are dried up, as well as the vines of Sibmah. The rulers of the nations trample all over its vines, which reach Jazer and spread to the desert; their shoots spread out and cross the sea.
ISA 16:9 So I weep along with Jazer over the vines of Sibmah. I will saturate you with my tears, Heshbon and Elealeh, for the conquering invaders shout triumphantly over your fruit and crops.
ISA 16:10 Joy and happiness disappear from the orchards, and in the vineyards no one rejoices or shouts; no one treads out juice in the wine vats – I have brought the joyful shouts to an end.
ISA 16:11 So my heart constantly sighs for Moab, like the strumming of a harp, my inner being sighs for Kir Hareseth.
ISA 16:12 When the Moabites plead with all their might at their high places, and enter their temples to pray, their prayers will be ineffective!
ISA 16:13 This is the message the Lord previously announced about Moab.
ISA 16:14 Now the Lord makes this announcement: “Within exactly three years Moab’s splendor will disappear, along with all her many people; there will be just a few, insignificant survivors left.”
ISA 17:1 Here is a message about Damascus: “Look, Damascus is no longer a city, it is a heap of ruins!
ISA 17:2 The cities of Aroer are abandoned. They will be used for herds, which will lie down there in peace.
ISA 17:3 Fortified cities will disappear from Ephraim, and Damascus will lose its kingdom. The survivors in Syria will end up like the splendor of the Israelites,” says the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 17:4 “At that time Jacob’s splendor will be greatly diminished, and he will become skin and bones.
ISA 17:5 It will be as when one gathers the grain harvest, and his hand gleans the ear of grain. It will be like one gathering the ears of grain in the Valley of Rephaim.
ISA 17:6 There will be some left behind, like when an olive tree is beaten – two or three ripe olives remain toward the very top, four or five on its fruitful branches,” says the Lord God of Israel.
ISA 17:7 At that time men will trust in their creator; they will depend on the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 17:8 They will no longer trust in the altars their hands made, or depend on the Asherah poles and incense altars their fingers made.
ISA 17:9 At that time their fortified cities will be like the abandoned summits of the Amorites, which they abandoned because of the Israelites; there will be desolation.
ISA 17:10 For you ignore the God who rescues you; you pay no attention to your strong protector. So this is what happens: You cultivate beautiful plants and plant exotic vines.
ISA 17:11 The day you begin cultivating, you do what you can to make it grow; the morning you begin planting, you do what you can to make it sprout. Yet the harvest will disappear in the day of disease and incurable pain.
ISA 17:12 The many nations massing together are as good as dead, those who make a commotion as loud as the roaring of the sea’s waves. The people making such an uproar are as good as dead, those who make an uproar as loud as the roaring of powerful waves.
ISA 17:13 Though these people make an uproar as loud as the roaring of powerful waves, when he shouts at them, they will flee to a distant land, driven before the wind like dead weeds on the hills, or like dead thistles before a strong gale.
ISA 17:14 In the evening there is sudden terror; by morning they vanish. This is the fate of those who try to plunder us, the destiny of those who try to loot us!
ISA 18:1 The land of buzzing wings is as good as dead, the one beyond the rivers of Cush,
ISA 18:2 that sends messengers by sea, who glide over the water’s surface in boats made of papyrus. Go, you swift messengers, to a nation of tall, smooth-skinned people, to a people that are feared far and wide, to a nation strong and victorious, whose land rivers divide.
ISA 18:3 All you who live in the world, who reside on the earth, you will see a signal flag raised on the mountains; you will hear a trumpet being blown.
ISA 18:4 For this is what the Lord has told me: “I will wait and watch from my place, like scorching heat produced by the sunlight, like a cloud of mist in the heat of harvest.”
ISA 18:5 For before the harvest, when the bud has sprouted, and the ripening fruit appears, he will cut off the unproductive shoots with pruning knives; he will prune the tendrils.
ISA 18:6 They will all be left for the birds of the hills and the wild animals; the birds will eat them during the summer, and all the wild animals will eat them during the winter.
ISA 18:7 At that time tribute will be brought to the Lord who commands armies, by a people that are tall and smooth-skinned, a people that are feared far and wide, a nation strong and victorious, whose land rivers divide. The tribute will be brought to the place where the Lord who commands armies has chosen to reside, on Mount Zion.
ISA 19:1 Here is a message about Egypt: Look, the Lord rides on a swift-moving cloud and approaches Egypt. The idols of Egypt tremble before him; the Egyptians lose their courage.
ISA 19:2 “I will provoke civil strife in Egypt, brothers will fight with each other, as will neighbors, cities, and kingdoms.
ISA 19:3 The Egyptians will panic, and I will confuse their strategy. They will seek guidance from the idols and from the spirits of the dead, from the pits used to conjure up underworld spirits, and from the magicians.
ISA 19:4 I will hand Egypt over to a harsh master; a powerful king will rule over them,” says the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 19:5 The water of the sea will be dried up, and the river will dry up and be empty.
ISA 19:6 The canals will stink; the streams of Egypt will trickle and then dry up; the bulrushes and reeds will decay,
ISA 19:7 along with the plants by the mouth of the river. All the cultivated land near the river will turn to dust and be blown away.
ISA 19:8 The fishermen will mourn and lament, all those who cast a fishhook into the river, and those who spread out a net on the water’s surface will grieve.
ISA 19:9 Those who make clothes from combed flax will be embarrassed; those who weave will turn pale.
ISA 19:10 Those who make cloth will be demoralized; all the hired workers will be depressed.
ISA 19:11 The officials of Zoan are nothing but fools; Pharaoh’s wise advisers give stupid advice. How dare you say to Pharaoh, “I am one of the sages, one well-versed in the writings of the ancient kings?”
ISA 19:12 But where, oh where, are your wise men? Let them tell you, let them find out what the Lord who commands armies has planned for Egypt.
ISA 19:13 The officials of Zoan are fools, the officials of Memphis are misled; the rulers of her tribes lead Egypt astray.
ISA 19:14 The Lord has made them undiscerning; they lead Egypt astray in all she does, so that she is like a drunk sliding around in his own vomit.
ISA 19:15 Egypt will not be able to do a thing, head or tail, shoots and stalk.
ISA 19:16 At that time the Egyptians will be like women. They will tremble and fear because the Lord who commands armies brandishes his fist against them.
ISA 19:17 The land of Judah will humiliate Egypt. Everyone who hears about Judah will be afraid because of what the Lord who commands armies is planning to do to them.
ISA 19:18 At that time five cities in the land of Egypt will speak the language of Canaan and swear allegiance to the Lord who commands armies. One will be called the City of the Sun.
ISA 19:19 At that time there will be an altar for the Lord in the middle of the land of Egypt, as well as a sacred pillar dedicated to the Lord at its border.
ISA 19:20 It will become a visual reminder in the land of Egypt of the Lord who commands armies. When they cry out to the Lord because of oppressors, he will send them a deliverer and defender who will rescue them.
ISA 19:21 The Lord will reveal himself to the Egyptians, and they will acknowledge the Lord’s authority at that time. They will present sacrifices and offerings; they will make vows to the Lord and fulfill them.
ISA 19:22 The Lord will strike Egypt, striking and then healing them. They will turn to the Lord and he will listen to their prayers and heal them.
ISA 19:23 At that time there will be a highway from Egypt to Assyria. The Assyrians will visit Egypt, and the Egyptians will visit Assyria. The Egyptians and Assyrians will worship together.
ISA 19:24 At that time Israel will be the third member of the group, along with Egypt and Assyria, and will be a recipient of blessing in the earth.
ISA 19:25 The Lord who commands armies will pronounce a blessing over the earth, saying, “Blessed be my people, Egypt, and the work of my hands, Assyria, and my special possession, Israel!”
ISA 20:1 The Lord revealed the following message during the year in which King Sargon of Assyria sent his commanding general to Ashdod, and he fought against it and captured it.
ISA 20:2 At that time the Lord announced through Isaiah son of Amoz: “Go, remove the sackcloth from your waist and take your sandals off your feet.” He did as instructed and walked around in undergarments and barefoot.
ISA 20:3 Later the Lord explained, “In the same way that my servant Isaiah has walked around in undergarments and barefoot for the past three years, as an object lesson and omen pertaining to Egypt and Cush,
ISA 20:4 so the king of Assyria will lead away the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Cush, both young and old. They will be in undergarments and barefoot, with the buttocks exposed; the Egyptians will be publicly humiliated.
ISA 20:5 Those who put their hope in Cush and took pride in Egypt will be afraid and embarrassed.
ISA 20:6 At that time those who live on this coast will say, ‘Look what has happened to our source of hope to whom we fled for help, expecting to be rescued from the king of Assyria! How can we escape now?’”
ISA 21:1 Here is a message about the Desert by the Sea: Like strong winds blowing in the south, one invades from the desert, from a land that is feared.
ISA 21:2 I have received a distressing message: “The deceiver deceives, the destroyer destroys. Attack, you Elamites! Lay siege, you Medes! I will put an end to all the groaning!”
ISA 21:3 For this reason my stomach churns; cramps overwhelm me like the contractions of a woman in labor. I am disturbed by what I hear, horrified by what I see.
ISA 21:4 My heart palpitates, I shake in fear; the twilight I desired has brought me terror.
ISA 21:5 Arrange the table, lay out the carpet, eat and drink! Get up, you officers, smear oil on the shields!
ISA 21:6 For this is what the sovereign master has told me: “Go, post a guard! He must report what he sees.
ISA 21:7 When he sees chariots, teams of horses, riders on donkeys, riders on camels, he must be alert, very alert.”
ISA 21:8 Then the guard cries out: “On the watchtower, O sovereign master, I stand all day long; at my post I am stationed every night.
ISA 21:9 Look what’s coming! A charioteer, a team of horses.” When questioned, he replies, “Babylon has fallen, fallen! All the idols of her gods lie shattered on the ground!”
ISA 21:10 O my downtrodden people, crushed like stalks on the threshing floor, what I have heard from the Lord who commands armies, the God of Israel, I have reported to you.
ISA 21:11 Here is a message about Dumah: Someone calls to me from Seir, “Watchman, what is left of the night? Watchman, what is left of the night?”
ISA 21:12 The watchman replies, “Morning is coming, but then night. If you want to ask, ask; come back again.”
ISA 21:13 Here is a message about Arabia: In the thicket of Arabia you spend the night, you Dedanite caravans.
ISA 21:14 Bring out some water for the thirsty. You who live in the land of Tema, bring some food for the fugitives.
ISA 21:15 For they flee from the swords – from the drawn sword and from the battle-ready bow and from the severity of the battle.
ISA 21:16 For this is what the sovereign master has told me: “Within exactly one year all the splendor of Kedar will come to an end.
ISA 21:17 Just a handful of archers, the warriors of Kedar, will be left.” Indeed, the Lord God of Israel has spoken.
ISA 22:1 Here is a message about the Valley of Vision: What is the reason that all of you go up to the rooftops?
ISA 22:2 The noisy city is full of raucous sounds; the town is filled with revelry. Your slain were not cut down by the sword; they did not die in battle.
ISA 22:3 All your leaders ran away together – they fled to a distant place; all your refugees were captured together – they were captured without a single arrow being shot.
ISA 22:4 So I say: “Don’t look at me! I am weeping bitterly. Don’t try to console me concerning the destruction of my defenseless people.”
ISA 22:5 For the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, has planned a day of panic, defeat, and confusion. In the Valley of Vision people shout and cry out to the hill.
ISA 22:6 The Elamites picked up the quiver, and came with chariots and horsemen; the men of Kir prepared the shield.
ISA 22:7 Your very best valleys were full of chariots; horsemen confidently took their positions at the gate.
ISA 22:8 They removed the defenses of Judah. At that time you looked for the weapons in the House of the Forest.
ISA 22:9 You saw the many breaks in the walls of the city of David; you stored up water in the lower pool.
ISA 22:10 You counted the houses in Jerusalem, and demolished houses so you could have material to reinforce the wall.
ISA 22:11 You made a reservoir between the two walls for the water of the old pool – but you did not trust in the one who made it; you did not depend on the one who formed it long ago!
ISA 22:12 At that time the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, called for weeping and mourning, for shaved heads and sackcloth.
ISA 22:13 But look, there is outright celebration! You say, “Kill the ox and slaughter the sheep, eat meat and drink wine. Eat and drink, for tomorrow we die!”
ISA 22:14 The Lord who commands armies told me this: “Certainly this sin will not be forgiven as long as you live,” says the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 22:15 This is what the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, says: “Go visit this administrator, Shebna, who supervises the palace, and tell him:
ISA 22:16 ‘What right do you have to be here? What relatives do you have buried here? Why do you chisel out a tomb for yourself here? He chisels out his burial site in an elevated place, he carves out his tomb on a cliff.
ISA 22:17 Look, the Lord will throw you far away, you mere man! He will wrap you up tightly.
ISA 22:18 He will wind you up tightly into a ball and throw you into a wide, open land. There you will die, and there with you will be your impressive chariots, which bring disgrace to the house of your master.
ISA 22:19 I will remove you from your office; you will be thrown down from your position.
ISA 22:20 “At that time I will summon my servant Eliakim, son of Hilkiah.
ISA 22:21 I will put your robe on him, tie your belt around him, and transfer your authority to him. He will become a protector of the residents of Jerusalem and of the people of Judah.
ISA 22:22 I will place the key to the house of David on his shoulder. When he opens the door, no one can close it; when he closes the door, no one can open it.
ISA 22:23 I will fasten him like a peg into a solid place; he will bring honor and respect to his father’s family.
ISA 22:24 His father’s family will gain increasing prominence because of him, including the offspring and the offshoots. All the small containers, including the bowls and all the jars will hang from this peg.’
ISA 22:25 “At that time,” says the Lord who commands armies, “the peg fastened into a solid place will come loose. It will be cut off and fall, and the load hanging on it will be cut off.” Indeed, the Lord has spoken.
ISA 23:1 Here is a message about Tyre: Wail, you large ships, for the port is too devastated to enter! From the land of Cyprus this news is announced to them.
ISA 23:2 Lament, you residents of the coast, you merchants of Sidon who travel over the sea, whose agents sail over
ISA 23:3 the deep waters! Grain from the Shihor region, crops grown near the Nile she receives; she is the trade center of the nations.
ISA 23:4 Be ashamed, O Sidon, for the sea says this, O fortress of the sea: “I have not gone into labor or given birth; I have not raised young men or brought up young women.”
ISA 23:5 When the news reaches Egypt, they will be shaken by what has happened to Tyre.
ISA 23:6 Travel to Tarshish! Wail, you residents of the coast!
ISA 23:7 Is this really your boisterous city whose origins are in the distant past, and whose feet led her to a distant land to reside?
ISA 23:8 Who planned this for royal Tyre, whose merchants are princes, whose traders are the dignitaries of the earth?
ISA 23:9 The Lord who commands armies planned it – to dishonor the pride that comes from all her beauty, to humiliate all the dignitaries of the earth.
ISA 23:10 Daughter Tarshish, travel back to your land, as one crosses the Nile; there is no longer any marketplace in Tyre.
ISA 23:11 The Lord stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook kingdoms; he gave the order to destroy Canaan’s fortresses.
ISA 23:12 He said, “You will no longer celebrate, oppressed virgin daughter Sidon! Get up, travel to Cyprus, but you will find no relief there.”
ISA 23:13 Look at the land of the Chaldeans, these people who have lost their identity! The Assyrians have made it a home for wild animals. They erected their siege towers, demolished its fortresses, and turned it into a heap of ruins.
ISA 23:14 Wail, you large ships, for your fortress is destroyed!
ISA 23:15 At that time Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years, the typical life span of a king. At the end of seventy years Tyre will try to attract attention again, like the prostitute in the popular song:
ISA 23:16 “Take the harp, go through the city, forgotten prostitute! Play it well, play lots of songs, so you’ll be noticed!”
ISA 23:17 At the end of seventy years the Lord will revive Tyre. She will start making money again by selling her services to all the earth’s kingdoms.
ISA 23:18 Her profits and earnings will be set apart for the Lord. They will not be stored up or accumulated, for her profits will be given to those who live in the Lord’s presence and will be used to purchase large quantities of food and beautiful clothes.
ISA 24:1 Look, the Lord is ready to devastate the earth and leave it in ruins; he will mar its surface and scatter its inhabitants.
ISA 24:2 Everyone will suffer – the priest as well as the people, the master as well as the servant, the elegant lady as well as the female attendant, the seller as well as the buyer, the borrower as well as the lender, the creditor as well as the debtor.
ISA 24:3 The earth will be completely devastated and thoroughly ransacked. For the Lord has decreed this judgment.
ISA 24:4 The earth dries up and withers, the world shrivels up and withers; the prominent people of the earth fade away.
ISA 24:5 The earth is defiled by its inhabitants, for they have violated laws, disregarded the regulation, and broken the permanent treaty.
ISA 24:6 So a treaty curse devours the earth; its inhabitants pay for their guilt. This is why the inhabitants of the earth disappear, and are reduced to just a handful of people.
ISA 24:7 The new wine dries up, the vines shrivel up, all those who like to celebrate groan.
ISA 24:8 The happy sound of the tambourines stops, the revelry of those who celebrate comes to a halt, the happy sound of the harp ceases.
ISA 24:9 They no longer sing and drink wine; the beer tastes bitter to those who drink it.
ISA 24:10 The ruined town is shattered; all of the houses are shut up tight.
ISA 24:11 They howl in the streets because of what happened to the wine; all joy turns to sorrow; celebrations disappear from the earth.
ISA 24:12 The city is left in ruins; the gate is reduced to rubble.
ISA 24:13 This is what will happen throughout the earth, among the nations. It will be like when they beat an olive tree, and just a few olives are left at the end of the harvest.
ISA 24:14 They lift their voices and shout joyfully; they praise the majesty of the Lord in the west.
ISA 24:15 So in the east extol the Lord, along the seacoasts extol the fame of the Lord God of Israel.
ISA 24:16 From the ends of the earth we hear songs – the Just One is majestic. But I say, “I’m wasting away! I’m wasting away! I’m doomed! Deceivers deceive, deceivers thoroughly deceive!”
ISA 24:17 Terror, pit, and snare are ready to overtake you inhabitants of the earth!
ISA 24:18 The one who runs away from the sound of the terror will fall into the pit; the one who climbs out of the pit, will be trapped by the snare. For the floodgates of the heavens are opened up and the foundations of the earth shake.
ISA 24:19 The earth is broken in pieces, the earth is ripped to shreds, the earth shakes violently.
ISA 24:20 The earth will stagger around like a drunk; it will sway back and forth like a hut in a windstorm. Its sin will weigh it down, and it will fall and never get up again.
ISA 24:21 At that time the Lord will punish the heavenly forces in the heavens and the earthly kings on the earth.
ISA 24:22 They will be imprisoned in a pit, locked up in a prison, and after staying there for a long time, they will be punished.
ISA 24:23 The full moon will be covered up, the bright sun will be darkened; for the Lord who commands armies will rule on Mount Zion in Jerusalem in the presence of his assembly, in majestic splendor.
ISA 25:1 O Lord, you are my God! I will exalt you in praise, I will extol your fame. For you have done extraordinary things, and executed plans made long ago exactly as you decreed.
ISA 25:2 Indeed, you have made the city into a heap of rubble, the fortified town into a heap of ruins; the fortress of foreigners is no longer a city, it will never be rebuilt.
ISA 25:3 So a strong nation will extol you; the towns of powerful nations will fear you.
ISA 25:4 For you are a protector for the poor, a protector for the needy in their distress, a shelter from the rainstorm, a shade from the heat. Though the breath of tyrants is like a winter rainstorm,
ISA 25:5 like heat in a dry land, you humble the boasting foreigners. Just as the shadow of a cloud causes the heat to subside, so he causes the song of tyrants to cease.
ISA 25:6 The Lord who commands armies will hold a banquet for all the nations on this mountain. At this banquet there will be plenty of meat and aged wine – tender meat and choicest wine.
ISA 25:7 On this mountain he will swallow up the shroud that is over all the peoples, the woven covering that is over all the nations;
ISA 25:8 he will swallow up death permanently. The sovereign Lord will wipe away the tears from every face, and remove his people’s disgrace from all the earth. Indeed, the Lord has announced it!
ISA 25:9 At that time they will say, “Look, here is our God! We waited for him and he delivered us. Here is the Lord! We waited for him. Let’s rejoice and celebrate his deliverance!”
ISA 25:10 For the Lord’s power will make this mountain secure. Moab will be trampled down where it stands, as a heap of straw is trampled down in a manure pile.
ISA 25:11 Moab will spread out its hands in the middle of it, just as a swimmer spreads his hands to swim; the Lord will bring down Moab’s pride as it spreads its hands.
ISA 25:12 The fortified city (along with the very tops of your walls) he will knock down, he will bring it down, he will throw it down to the dusty ground.
ISA 26:1 At that time this song will be sung in the land of Judah: “We have a strong city! The Lord’s deliverance, like walls and a rampart, makes it secure.
ISA 26:2 Open the gates so a righteous nation can enter – one that remains trustworthy.
ISA 26:3 You keep completely safe the people who maintain their faith, for they trust in you.
ISA 26:4 Trust in the Lord from this time forward, even in Yah, the Lord, an enduring protector!
ISA 26:5 Indeed, the Lord knocks down those who live in a high place, he brings down an elevated town; he brings it down to the ground, he throws it down to the dust.
ISA 26:6 It is trampled underfoot by the feet of the oppressed, by the soles of the poor.”
ISA 26:7 The way of the righteous is level, the path of the righteous that you make is straight.
ISA 26:8 Yes, as your judgments unfold, O Lord, we wait for you. We desire your fame and reputation to grow.
ISA 26:9 I look for you during the night, my spirit within me seeks you at dawn, for when your judgments come upon the earth, those who live in the world learn about justice.
ISA 26:10 If the wicked are shown mercy, they do not learn about justice. Even in a land where right is rewarded, they act unjustly; they do not see the Lord’s majesty revealed.
ISA 26:11 O Lord, you are ready to act, but they don’t even notice. They will see and be put to shame by your angry judgment against humankind, yes, fire will consume your enemies.
ISA 26:12 O Lord, you make us secure, for even all we have accomplished, you have done for us.
ISA 26:13 O Lord, our God, masters other than you have ruled us, but we praise your name alone.
ISA 26:14 The dead do not come back to life, the spirits of the dead do not rise. That is because you came in judgment and destroyed them, you wiped out all memory of them.
ISA 26:15 You have made the nation larger, O Lord, you have made the nation larger and revealed your splendor, you have extended all the borders of the land.
ISA 26:16 O Lord, in distress they looked for you; they uttered incantations because of your discipline.
ISA 26:17 As when a pregnant woman gets ready to deliver and strains and cries out because of her labor pains, so were we because of you, O Lord.
ISA 26:18 We were pregnant, we strained, we gave birth, as it were, to wind. We cannot produce deliverance on the earth; people to populate the world are not born.
ISA 26:19 Your dead will come back to life; your corpses will rise up. Wake up and shout joyfully, you who live in the ground! For you will grow like plants drenched with the morning dew, and the earth will bring forth its dead spirits.
ISA 26:20 Go, my people! Enter your inner rooms! Close your doors behind you! Hide for a little while, until his angry judgment is over!
ISA 26:21 For look, the Lord is coming out of the place where he lives, to punish the sin of those who live on the earth. The earth will display the blood shed on it; it will no longer cover up its slain.
ISA 27:1 At that time the Lord will punish with his destructive, great, and powerful sword Leviathan the fast-moving serpent, Leviathan the squirming serpent; he will kill the sea monster.
ISA 27:2 When that time comes, sing about a delightful vineyard!
ISA 27:3 I, the Lord, protect it; I water it regularly. I guard it night and day, so no one can harm it.
ISA 27:4 I am not angry. I wish I could confront some thorns and briers! Then I would march against them for battle; I would set them all on fire,
ISA 27:5 unless they became my subjects and made peace with me; let them make peace with me.
ISA 27:6 The time is coming when Jacob will take root; Israel will blossom and grow branches. The produce will fill the surface of the world.
ISA 27:7 Has the Lord struck down Israel like he did their oppressors? Has Israel been killed like their enemies?
ISA 27:8 When you summon her for divorce, you prosecute her; he drives her away with his strong wind in the day of the east wind.
ISA 27:9 So in this way Jacob’s sin will be forgiven, and this is how they will show they are finished sinning: They will make all the stones of the altars like crushed limestone, and the Asherah poles and the incense altars will no longer stand.
ISA 27:10 For the fortified city is left alone; it is a deserted settlement and abandoned like the desert. Calves graze there; they lie down there and eat its branches bare.
ISA 27:11 When its branches get brittle, they break; women come and use them for kindling. For these people lack understanding, therefore the one who made them has no compassion on them; the one who formed them has no mercy on them.
ISA 27:12 At that time the Lord will shake the tree, from the Euphrates River to the Stream of Egypt. Then you will be gathered up one by one, O Israelites.
ISA 27:13 At that time a large trumpet will be blown, and the ones lost in the land of Assyria will come, as well as the refugees in the land of Egypt. They will worship the Lord on the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
ISA 28:1 The splendid crown of Ephraim’s drunkards is doomed, the withering flower, its beautiful splendor, situated at the head of a rich valley, the crown of those overcome with wine.
ISA 28:2 Look, the sovereign master sends a strong, powerful one. With the force of a hailstorm or a destructive windstorm, with the might of a driving, torrential rainstorm, he will knock that crown to the ground with his hand.
ISA 28:3 The splendid crown of Ephraim’s drunkards will be trampled underfoot.
ISA 28:4 The withering flower, its beautiful splendor, situated at the head of a rich valley, will be like an early fig before harvest – as soon as someone notices it, he grabs it and swallows it.
ISA 28:5 At that time the Lord who commands armies will become a beautiful crown and a splendid diadem for the remnant of his people.
ISA 28:6 He will give discernment to the one who makes judicial decisions, and strength to those who defend the city from attackers.
ISA 28:7 Even these men stagger because of wine, they stumble around because of beer – priests and prophets stagger because of beer, they are confused because of wine, they stumble around because of beer; they stagger while seeing prophetic visions, they totter while making legal decisions.
ISA 28:8 Indeed, all the tables are covered with vomit; no place is untouched.
ISA 28:9 Who is the Lord trying to teach? To whom is he explaining a message? Those just weaned from milk! Those just taken from their mother’s breast!
ISA 28:10 Indeed, they will hear meaningless gibberish, senseless babbling, a syllable here, a syllable there.
ISA 28:11 For with mocking lips and a foreign tongue he will speak to these people.
ISA 28:12 In the past he said to them, “This is where security can be found. Provide security for the one who is exhausted! This is where rest can be found.” But they refused to listen.
ISA 28:13 So the Lord’s word to them will sound like meaningless gibberish, senseless babbling, a syllable here, a syllable there. As a result, they will fall on their backsides when they try to walk, and be injured, ensnared, and captured.
ISA 28:14 Therefore, listen to the Lord’s word, you who mock, you rulers of these people who reside in Jerusalem!
ISA 28:15 For you say, “We have made a treaty with death, with Sheol we have made an agreement. When the overwhelming judgment sweeps by it will not reach us. For we have made a lie our refuge, we have hidden ourselves in a deceitful word.”
ISA 28:16 Therefore, this is what the sovereign master, the Lord, says: “Look, I am laying a stone in Zion, an approved stone, set in place as a precious cornerstone for the foundation. The one who maintains his faith will not panic.
ISA 28:17 I will make justice the measuring line, fairness the plumb line; hail will sweep away the unreliable refuge, the floodwaters will overwhelm the hiding place.
ISA 28:18 Your treaty with death will be dissolved; your agreement with Sheol will not last. When the overwhelming judgment sweeps by, you will be overrun by it.
ISA 28:19 Whenever it sweeps by, it will overtake you; indeed, every morning it will sweep by, it will come through during the day and the night.” When this announcement is understood, it will cause nothing but terror.
ISA 28:20 For the bed is too short to stretch out on, and the blanket is too narrow to wrap around oneself.
ISA 28:21 For the Lord will rise up, as he did at Mount Perazim, he will rouse himself, as he did in the Valley of Gibeon, to accomplish his work, his peculiar work, to perform his task, his strange task.
ISA 28:22 So now, do not mock, or your chains will become heavier! For I have heard a message about decreed destruction, from the sovereign master, the Lord who commands armies, against the entire land.
ISA 28:23 Pay attention and listen to my message! Be attentive and listen to what I have to say!
ISA 28:24 Does a farmer just keep on plowing at planting time? Does he keep breaking up and harrowing his ground?
ISA 28:25 Once he has leveled its surface, does he not scatter the seed of the caraway plant, sow the seed of the cumin plant, and plant the wheat, barley, and grain in their designated places?
ISA 28:26 His God instructs him; he teaches him the principles of agriculture.
ISA 28:27 Certainly caraway seed is not threshed with a sledge, nor is the wheel of a cart rolled over cumin seed. Certainly caraway seed is beaten with a stick, and cumin seed with a flail.
ISA 28:28 Grain is crushed, though one certainly does not thresh it forever. The wheel of one’s wagon rolls over it, but his horses do not crush it.
ISA 28:29 This also comes from the Lord who commands armies, who gives supernatural guidance and imparts great wisdom.
ISA 29:1 Ariel is as good as dead – Ariel, the town David besieged! Keep observing your annual rituals, celebrate your festivals on schedule.
ISA 29:2 I will threaten Ariel, and she will mourn intensely and become like an altar hearth before me.
ISA 29:3 I will lay siege to you on all sides; I will besiege you with troops; I will raise siege works against you.
ISA 29:4 You will fall; while lying on the ground you will speak; from the dust where you lie, your words will be heard. Your voice will sound like a spirit speaking from the underworld; from the dust you will chirp as if muttering an incantation.
ISA 29:5 But the horde of invaders will be like fine dust, the horde of tyrants like chaff that is blown away. It will happen suddenly, in a flash.
ISA 29:6 Judgment will come from the Lord who commands armies, accompanied by thunder, earthquake, and a loud noise, by a strong gale, a windstorm, and a consuming flame of fire.
ISA 29:7 It will be like a dream, a night vision. There will be a horde from all the nations that fight against Ariel, those who attack her and her stronghold and besiege her.
ISA 29:8 It will be like a hungry man dreaming that he is eating, only to awaken and find that his stomach is empty. It will be like a thirsty man dreaming that he is drinking, only to awaken and find that he is still weak and his thirst unquenched. So it will be for the horde from all the nations that fight against Mount Zion.
ISA 29:9 You will be shocked and amazed! You are totally blind! They are drunk, but not because of wine; they stagger, but not because of beer.
ISA 29:10 For the Lord has poured out on you a strong urge to sleep deeply. He has shut your eyes (the prophets), and covered your heads (the seers).
ISA 29:11 To you this entire prophetic revelation is like words in a sealed scroll. When they hand it to one who can read and say, “Read this,” he responds, “I can’t, because it is sealed.”
ISA 29:12 Or when they hand the scroll to one who can’t read and say, “Read this,” he says, “I can’t read.”
ISA 29:13 The sovereign master says, “These people say they are loyal to me; they say wonderful things about me, but they are not really loyal to me. Their worship consists of nothing but man-made ritual.
ISA 29:14 Therefore I will again do an amazing thing for these people – an absolutely extraordinary deed. Wise men will have nothing to say, the sages will have no explanations.”
ISA 29:15 Those who try to hide their plans from the Lord are as good as dead, who do their work in secret and boast, “Who sees us? Who knows what we’re doing?”
ISA 29:16 Your thinking is perverse! Should the potter be regarded as clay? Should the thing made say about its maker, “He didn’t make me”? Or should the pottery say about the potter, “He doesn’t understand”?
ISA 29:17 In just a very short time Lebanon will turn into an orchard, and the orchard will be considered a forest.
ISA 29:18 At that time the deaf will be able to hear words read from a scroll, and the eyes of the blind will be able to see through deep darkness.
ISA 29:19 The downtrodden will again rejoice in the Lord; the poor among humankind will take delight in the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 29:20 For tyrants will disappear, those who taunt will vanish, and all those who love to do wrong will be eliminated –
ISA 29:21 those who bear false testimony against a person, who entrap the one who arbitrates at the city gate and deprive the innocent of justice by making false charges.
ISA 29:22 So this is what the Lord, the one who delivered Abraham, says to the family of Jacob: “Jacob will no longer be ashamed; their faces will no longer show their embarrassment.
ISA 29:23 For when they see their children, whom I will produce among them, they will honor my name. They will honor the Holy One of Jacob; they will respect the God of Israel.
ISA 29:24 Those who stray morally will gain understanding; those who complain will acquire insight.
ISA 30:1 “The rebellious children are as good as dead,” says the Lord, “those who make plans without consulting me, who form alliances without consulting my Spirit, and thereby compound their sin.
ISA 30:2 They travel down to Egypt without seeking my will, seeking Pharaoh’s protection, and looking for safety in Egypt’s protective shade.
ISA 30:3 But Pharaoh’s protection will bring you nothing but shame, and the safety of Egypt’s protective shade nothing but humiliation.
ISA 30:4 Though his officials are in Zoan and his messengers arrive at Hanes,
ISA 30:5 all will be put to shame because of a nation that cannot help them, who cannot give them aid or help, but only shame and disgrace.”
ISA 30:6 This is a message about the animals in the Negev: Through a land of distress and danger, inhabited by lionesses and roaring lions, by snakes and darting adders, they transport their wealth on the backs of donkeys, their riches on the humps of camels, to a nation that cannot help them.
ISA 30:7 Egypt is totally incapable of helping. For this reason I call her ‘Proud one who is silenced.’”
ISA 30:8 Now go, write it down on a tablet in their presence, inscribe it on a scroll, so that it might be preserved for a future time as an enduring witness.
ISA 30:9 For these are rebellious people – they are lying children, children unwilling to obey the Lord’s law.
ISA 30:10 They say to the visionaries, “See no more visions!” and to the seers, “Don’t relate messages to us about what is right! Tell us nice things, relate deceptive messages.
ISA 30:11 Turn aside from the way, stray off the path. Remove from our presence the Holy One of Israel.”
ISA 30:12 For this reason this is what the Holy One of Israel says: “You have rejected this message; you trust instead in your ability to oppress and trick, and rely on that kind of behavior.
ISA 30:13 So this sin will become your downfall. You will be like a high wall that bulges and cracks and is ready to collapse; it crumbles suddenly, in a flash.
ISA 30:14 It shatters in pieces like a clay jar, so shattered to bits that none of it can be salvaged. Among its fragments one cannot find a shard large enough to scoop a hot coal from a fire or to skim off water from a cistern.”
ISA 30:15 For this is what the master, the Lord, the Holy One of Israel says: “If you repented and patiently waited for me, you would be delivered; if you calmly trusted in me you would find strength, but you are unwilling.
ISA 30:16 You say, ‘No, we will flee on horses,’ so you will indeed flee. You say, ‘We will ride on fast horses,’ so your pursuers will be fast.
ISA 30:17 One thousand will scurry at the battle cry of one enemy soldier; at the battle cry of five enemy soldiers you will all run away, until the remaining few are as isolated as a flagpole on a mountaintop or a signal flag on a hill.”
ISA 30:18 For this reason the Lord is ready to show you mercy; he sits on his throne, ready to have compassion on you. Indeed, the Lord is a just God; all who wait for him in faith will be blessed.
ISA 30:19 For people will live in Zion; in Jerusalem you will weep no more. When he hears your cry of despair, he will indeed show you mercy; when he hears it, he will respond to you.
ISA 30:20 The sovereign master will give you distress to eat and suffering to drink; but your teachers will no longer be hidden; your eyes will see them.
ISA 30:21 You will hear a word spoken behind you, saying, “This is the correct way, walk in it,” whether you are heading to the right or the left.
ISA 30:22 You will desecrate your silver-plated idols and your gold-plated images. You will throw them away as if they were a menstrual rag, saying to them, “Get out!”
ISA 30:23 He will water the seed you plant in the ground, and the ground will produce crops in abundance. At that time your cattle will graze in wide pastures.
ISA 30:24 The oxen and donkeys used in plowing will eat seasoned feed winnowed with a shovel and pitchfork.
ISA 30:25 On every high mountain and every high hill there will be streams flowing with water, at the time of great slaughter when the fortified towers collapse.
ISA 30:26 The light of the full moon will be like the sun’s glare and the sun’s glare will be seven times brighter, like the light of seven days, when the Lord binds up his people’s fractured bones and heals their severe wound.
ISA 30:27 Look, the name of the Lord comes from a distant place in raging anger and awesome splendor. He speaks angrily and his word is like destructive fire.
ISA 30:28 His battle cry overwhelms like a flooding river that reaches one’s neck. He shakes the nations in a sieve that isolates the chaff; he puts a bit into the mouth of the nations and leads them to destruction.
ISA 30:29 You will sing as you do in the evening when you are celebrating a festival. You will be happy like one who plays a flute as he goes to the mountain of the Lord, the Rock who shelters Israel.
ISA 30:30 The Lord will give a mighty shout and intervene in power, with furious anger and flaming, destructive fire, with a driving rainstorm and hailstones.
ISA 30:31 Indeed, the Lord’s shout will shatter Assyria; he will beat them with a club.
ISA 30:32 Every blow from his punishing cudgel, with which the Lord will beat them, will be accompanied by music from the tambourine and harp, and he will attack them with his weapons.
ISA 30:33 For the burial place is already prepared; it has been made deep and wide for the king. The firewood is piled high on it. The Lord’s breath, like a stream flowing with brimstone, will ignite it.
ISA 31:1 Those who go down to Egypt for help are as good as dead, those who rely on war horses, and trust in Egypt’s many chariots and in their many, many horsemen. But they do not rely on the Holy One of Israel and do not seek help from the Lord.
ISA 31:2 Yet he too is wise and he will bring disaster; he does not retract his decree. He will attack the wicked nation, and the nation that helps those who commit sin.
ISA 31:3 The Egyptians are mere humans, not God; their horses are made of flesh, not spirit. The Lord will strike with his hand; the one who helps will stumble and the one being helped will fall. Together they will perish.
ISA 31:4 Indeed, this is what the Lord says to me: “The Lord will be like a growling lion, like a young lion growling over its prey. Though a whole group of shepherds gathers against it, it is not afraid of their shouts or intimidated by their yelling. In this same way the Lord who commands armies will descend to do battle on Mount Zion and on its hill.
ISA 31:5 Just as birds hover over a nest, so the Lord who commands armies will protect Jerusalem. He will protect and deliver it; as he passes over he will rescue it.
ISA 31:6 You Israelites! Return to the one against whom you have so blatantly rebelled!
ISA 31:7 For at that time everyone will get rid of the silver and gold idols your hands sinfully made.
ISA 31:8 Assyria will fall by a sword, but not one human-made; a sword not made by humankind will destroy them. They will run away from this sword and their young men will be forced to do hard labor.
ISA 31:9 They will surrender their stronghold because of fear; their officers will be afraid of the Lord’s battle flag.” This is what the Lord says – the one whose fire is in Zion, whose firepot is in Jerusalem.
ISA 32:1 Look, a king will promote fairness; officials will promote justice.
ISA 32:2 Each of them will be like a shelter from the wind and a refuge from a rainstorm; like streams of water in a dry region and like the shade of a large cliff in a parched land.
ISA 32:3 Eyes will no longer be blind and ears will be attentive.
ISA 32:4 The mind that acts rashly will possess discernment and the tongue that stutters will speak with ease and clarity.
ISA 32:5 A fool will no longer be called honorable; a deceiver will no longer be called principled.
ISA 32:6 For a fool speaks disgraceful things; his mind plans out sinful deeds. He commits godless deeds and says misleading things about the Lord; he gives the hungry nothing to satisfy their appetite and gives the thirsty nothing to drink.
ISA 32:7 A deceiver’s methods are evil; he dreams up evil plans to ruin the poor with lies, even when the needy are in the right.
ISA 32:8 An honorable man makes honorable plans; his honorable character gives him security.
ISA 32:9 You complacent women, get up and listen to me! You carefree daughters, pay attention to what I say!
ISA 32:10 In a year’s time you carefree ones will shake with fear, for the grape harvest will fail, and the fruit harvest will not arrive.
ISA 32:11 Tremble, you complacent ones! Shake with fear, you carefree ones! Strip off your clothes and expose yourselves – put sackcloth on your waist!
ISA 32:12 Mourn over the field, over the delightful fields and the fruitful vine!
ISA 32:13 Mourn over the land of my people, which is overgrown with thorns and briers, and over all the once-happy houses in the city filled with revelry.
ISA 32:14 For the fortress is neglected; the once-crowded city is abandoned. Hill and watchtower are permanently uninhabited. Wild donkeys love to go there, and flocks graze there.
ISA 32:15 This desolation will continue until new life is poured out on us from heaven. Then the desert will become an orchard and the orchard will be considered a forest.
ISA 32:16 Justice will settle down in the desert and fairness will live in the orchard.
ISA 32:17 Fairness will produce peace and result in lasting security.
ISA 32:18 My people will live in peaceful settlements, in secure homes, and in safe, quiet places.
ISA 32:19 Even if the forest is destroyed and the city is annihilated,
ISA 32:20 you will be blessed, you who plant seed by all the banks of the streams, you who let your ox and donkey graze.
ISA 33:1 The destroyer is as good as dead, you who have not been destroyed! The deceitful one is as good as dead, the one whom others have not deceived! When you are through destroying, you will be destroyed; when you finish deceiving, others will deceive you!
ISA 33:2 Lord, be merciful to us! We wait for you. Give us strength each morning! Deliver us when distress comes.
ISA 33:3 The nations run away when they hear a loud noise; the nations scatter when you spring into action!
ISA 33:4 Your plunder disappears as if locusts were eating it; they swarm over it like locusts!
ISA 33:5 The Lord is exalted, indeed, he lives in heaven; he fills Zion with justice and fairness.
ISA 33:6 He is your constant source of stability; he abundantly provides safety and great wisdom; he gives all this to those who fear him.
ISA 33:7 Look, ambassadors cry out in the streets; messengers sent to make peace weep bitterly.
ISA 33:8 Highways are empty, there are no travelers. Treaties are broken, witnesses are despised, human life is treated with disrespect.
ISA 33:9 The land dries up and withers away; the forest of Lebanon shrivels up and decays. Sharon is like the desert; Bashan and Carmel are parched.
ISA 33:10 “Now I will rise up,” says the Lord. “Now I will exalt myself; now I will magnify myself.
ISA 33:11 You conceive straw, you give birth to chaff; your breath is a fire that destroys you.
ISA 33:12 The nations will be burned to ashes; like thorn bushes that have been cut down, they will be set on fire.
ISA 33:13 You who are far away, listen to what I have done! You who are close by, recognize my strength!”
ISA 33:14 Sinners are afraid in Zion; panic grips the godless. They say, ‘Who among us can coexist with destructive fire? Who among us can coexist with unquenchable fire?’
ISA 33:15 The one who lives uprightly and speaks honestly; the one who refuses to profit from oppressive measures and rejects a bribe; the one who does not plot violent crimes and does not seek to harm others –
ISA 33:16 This is the person who will live in a secure place; he will find safety in the rocky, mountain strongholds; he will have food and a constant supply of water.
ISA 33:17 You will see a king in his splendor; you will see a wide land.
ISA 33:18 Your mind will recall the terror you experienced, and you will ask yourselves, “Where is the scribe? Where is the one who weighs the money? Where is the one who counts the towers?”
ISA 33:19 You will no longer see a defiant people whose language you do not comprehend, whose derisive speech you do not understand.
ISA 33:20 Look at Zion, the city where we hold religious festivals! You will see Jerusalem, a peaceful settlement, a tent that stays put; its stakes will never be pulled up; none of its ropes will snap in two.
ISA 33:21 Instead the Lord will rule there as our mighty king. Rivers and wide streams will flow through it; no war galley will enter; no large ships will sail through.
ISA 33:22 For the Lord, our ruler, the Lord, our commander, the Lord, our king – he will deliver us.
ISA 33:23 Though at this time your ropes are slack, the mast is not secured, and the sail is not unfurled, at that time you will divide up a great quantity of loot; even the lame will drag off plunder.
ISA 33:24 No resident of Zion will say, “I am ill”; the people who live there will have their sin forgiven.
ISA 34:1 Come near, you nations, and listen! Pay attention, you people! The earth and everything it contains must listen, the world and everything that lives in it.
ISA 34:2 For the Lord is angry at all the nations and furious with all their armies. He will annihilate them and slaughter them.
ISA 34:3 Their slain will be left unburied, their corpses will stink; the hills will soak up their blood.
ISA 34:4 All the stars in the sky will fade away, the sky will roll up like a scroll; all its stars will wither, like a leaf withers and falls from a vine or a fig withers and falls from a tree.
ISA 34:5 He says, “Indeed, my sword has slaughtered heavenly powers. Look, it now descends on Edom, on the people I will annihilate in judgment.”
ISA 34:6 The Lord’s sword is dripping with blood, it is covered with fat; it drips with the blood of young rams and goats and is covered with the fat of rams’ kidneys. For the Lord is holding a sacrifice in Bozrah, a bloody slaughter in the land of Edom.
ISA 34:7 Wild oxen will be slaughtered along with them, as well as strong bulls. Their land is drenched with blood, their soil is covered with fat.
ISA 34:8 For the Lord has planned a day of revenge, a time when he will repay Edom for her hostility toward Zion.
ISA 34:9 Edom’s streams will be turned into pitch and her soil into brimstone; her land will become burning pitch.
ISA 34:10 Night and day it will burn; its smoke will ascend continually. Generation after generation it will be a wasteland and no one will ever pass through it again.
ISA 34:11 Owls and wild animals will live there, all kinds of wild birds will settle in it. The Lord will stretch out over her the measuring line of ruin and the plumb line of destruction.
ISA 34:12 Her nobles will have nothing left to call a kingdom and all her officials will disappear.
ISA 34:13 Her fortresses will be overgrown with thorns; thickets and weeds will grow in her fortified cities. Jackals will settle there; ostriches will live there.
ISA 34:14 Wild animals and wild dogs will congregate there; wild goats will bleat to one another. Yes, nocturnal animals will rest there and make for themselves a nest.
ISA 34:15 Owls will make nests and lay eggs there; they will hatch them and protect them. Yes, hawks will gather there, each with its mate.
ISA 34:16 Carefully read the scroll of the Lord! Not one of these creatures will be missing, none will lack a mate. For the Lord has issued the decree, and his own spirit gathers them.
ISA 34:17 He assigns them their allotment; he measures out their assigned place. They will live there permanently; they will settle in it through successive generations.
ISA 35:1 Let the desert and dry region be happy; let the wilderness rejoice and bloom like a lily!
ISA 35:2 Let it richly bloom; let it rejoice and shout with delight! It is given the grandeur of Lebanon, the splendor of Carmel and Sharon. They will see the grandeur of the Lord, the splendor of our God.
ISA 35:3 Strengthen the hands that have gone limp, steady the knees that shake!
ISA 35:4 Tell those who panic, “Be strong! Do not fear! Look, your God comes to avenge! With divine retribution he comes to deliver you.”
ISA 35:5 Then blind eyes will open, deaf ears will hear.
ISA 35:6 Then the lame will leap like a deer, the mute tongue will shout for joy; for water will flow in the desert, streams in the wilderness.
ISA 35:7 The dry soil will become a pool of water, the parched ground springs of water. Where jackals once lived and sprawled out, grass, reeds, and papyrus will grow.
ISA 35:8 A thoroughfare will be there – it will be called the Way of Holiness. The unclean will not travel on it; it is reserved for those authorized to use it – fools will not stray into it.
ISA 35:9 No lions will be there, no ferocious wild animals will be on it – they will not be found there. Those delivered from bondage will travel on it,
ISA 35:10 those whom the Lord has ransomed will return that way. They will enter Zion with a happy shout. Unending joy will crown them, happiness and joy will overwhelm them; grief and suffering will disappear.
ISA 36:1 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah’s reign, King Sennacherib of Assyria marched up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
ISA 36:2 The king of Assyria sent his chief adviser from Lachish to King Hezekiah in Jerusalem, along with a large army. The chief adviser stood at the conduit of the upper pool which is located on the road to the field where they wash and dry cloth.
ISA 36:3 Eliakim son of Hilkiah, the palace supervisor, accompanied by Shebna the scribe and Joah son of Asaph, the secretary, went out to meet him.
ISA 36:4 The chief adviser said to them, “Tell Hezekiah: ‘This is what the great king, the king of Assyria, says: “What is your source of confidence?
ISA 36:5 Your claim to have a strategy and military strength is just empty talk. In whom are you trusting, that you would dare to rebel against me?
ISA 36:6 Look, you must be trusting in Egypt, that splintered reed staff. If someone leans on it for support, it punctures his hand and wounds him. That is what Pharaoh king of Egypt does to all who trust in him!
ISA 36:7 Perhaps you will tell me, ‘We are trusting in the Lord our God.’ But Hezekiah is the one who eliminated his high places and altars and then told the people of Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You must worship at this altar.’
ISA 36:8 Now make a deal with my master the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, provided you can find enough riders for them.
ISA 36:9 Certainly you will not refuse one of my master’s minor officials and trust in Egypt for chariots and horsemen.
ISA 36:10 Furthermore it was by the command of the Lord that I marched up against this land to destroy it. The Lord told me, ‘March up against this land and destroy it!’”’”
ISA 36:11 Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah said to the chief adviser, “Speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. Don’t speak with us in the Judahite dialect in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.”
ISA 36:12 But the chief adviser said, “My master did not send me to speak these words only to your master and to you. His message is also for the men who sit on the wall, for they will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you!”
ISA 36:13 The chief adviser then stood there and called out loudly in the Judahite dialect, “Listen to the message of the great king, the king of Assyria.
ISA 36:14 This is what the king says: ‘Don’t let Hezekiah mislead you, for he is not able to rescue you!
ISA 36:15 Don’t let Hezekiah talk you into trusting in the Lord by saying, “The Lord will certainly rescue us; this city will not be handed over to the king of Assyria.”
ISA 36:16 Don’t listen to Hezekiah!’ For this is what the king of Assyria says, ‘Send me a token of your submission and surrender to me. Then each of you may eat from his own vine and fig tree and drink water from his own cistern,
ISA 36:17 until I come and take you to a land just like your own – a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
ISA 36:18 Hezekiah is misleading you when he says, “The Lord will rescue us.” Has any of the gods of the nations rescued his land from the power of the king of Assyria?
ISA 36:19 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Indeed, did any gods rescue Samaria from my power?
ISA 36:20 Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their lands from my power? So how can the Lord rescue Jerusalem from my power?’”
ISA 36:21 They were silent and did not respond, for the king had ordered, “Don’t respond to him.”
ISA 36:22 Eliakim son of Hilkiah, the palace supervisor, accompanied by Shebna the scribe and Joah son of Asaph, the secretary, went to Hezekiah with their clothes torn in grief and reported to him what the chief adviser had said.
ISA 37:1 When King Hezekiah heard this, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and went to the Lord’s temple.
ISA 37:2 Eliakim the palace supervisor, Shebna the scribe, and the leading priests, clothed in sackcloth, sent this message to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz:
ISA 37:3 “This is what Hezekiah says: ‘This is a day of distress, insults, and humiliation, as when a baby is ready to leave the birth canal, but the mother lacks the strength to push it through.
ISA 37:4 Perhaps the Lord your God will hear all these things the chief adviser has spoken on behalf of his master, the king of Assyria, who sent him to taunt the living God. When the Lord your God hears, perhaps he will punish him for the things he has said. So pray for this remnant that remains.’”
ISA 37:5 When King Hezekiah’s servants came to Isaiah,
ISA 37:6 Isaiah said to them, “Tell your master this: ‘This is what the Lord says: “Don’t be afraid because of the things you have heard – these insults the king of Assyria’s servants have hurled against me.
ISA 37:7 Look, I will take control of his mind; he will receive a report and return to his own land. I will cut him down with a sword in his own land.”’”
ISA 37:8 When the chief adviser heard the king of Assyria had departed from Lachish, he left and went to Libnah, where the king was campaigning.
ISA 37:9 The king heard that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was marching out to fight him. He again sent messengers to Hezekiah, ordering them:
ISA 37:10 “Tell King Hezekiah of Judah this: ‘Don’t let your God in whom you trust mislead you when he says, “Jerusalem will not be handed over to the king of Assyria.”
ISA 37:11 Certainly you have heard how the kings of Assyria have annihilated all lands. Do you really think you will be rescued?
ISA 37:12 Were the nations whom my predecessors destroyed – the nations of Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the people of Eden in Telassar – rescued by their gods?
ISA 37:13 Where are the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, and the kings of Lair, Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah?’”
ISA 37:14 Hezekiah took the letter from the messengers and read it. Then Hezekiah went up to the Lord’s temple and spread it out before the Lord.
ISA 37:15 Hezekiah prayed before the Lord:
ISA 37:16 “O Lord who commands armies, O God of Israel, who is enthroned on the cherubim! You alone are God over all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the sky and the earth.
ISA 37:17 Pay attention, Lord, and hear! Open your eyes, Lord, and observe! Listen to this entire message Sennacherib sent and how he taunts the living God!
ISA 37:18 It is true, Lord, that the kings of Assyria have destroyed all the nations and their lands.
ISA 37:19 They have burned the gods of the nations, for they are not really gods, but only the product of human hands manufactured from wood and stone. That is why the Assyrians could destroy them.
ISA 37:20 Now, O Lord our God, rescue us from his power, so all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are the Lord.”
ISA 37:21 Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to Hezekiah: “This is what the Lord God of Israel says: ‘Because you prayed to me concerning King Sennacherib of Assyria,
ISA 37:22 this is what the Lord says about him: “The virgin daughter Zion despises you – she makes fun of you; daughter Jerusalem shakes her head after you.
ISA 37:23 Whom have you taunted and hurled insults at? At whom have you shouted and looked so arrogantly? At the Holy One of Israel!
ISA 37:24 Through your messengers you taunted the sovereign master, ‘With my many chariots I climbed up the high mountains, the slopes of Lebanon. I cut down its tall cedars and its best evergreens. I invaded its most remote regions, its thickest woods.
ISA 37:25 I dug wells and drank water. With the soles of my feet I dried up all the rivers of Egypt.’
ISA 37:26 Certainly you must have heard! Long ago I worked it out, in ancient times I planned it, and now I am bringing it to pass. The plan is this: Fortified cities will crash into heaps of ruins.
ISA 37:27 Their residents are powerless; they are terrified and ashamed. They are as short-lived as plants in the field or green vegetation. They are as short-lived as grass on the rooftops when it is scorched by the east wind.
ISA 37:28 I know where you live and everything you do and how you rage against me.
ISA 37:29 Because you rage against me and the uproar you create has reached my ears, I will put my hook in your nose, and my bridle between your lips, and I will lead you back the way you came.”
ISA 37:30 “This will be your reminder that I have spoken the truth: This year you will eat what grows wild, and next year what grows on its own. But the year after that you will plant seed and harvest crops; you will plant vines and consume their produce.
ISA 37:31 Those who remain in Judah will take root in the ground and bear fruit.
ISA 37:32 “For a remnant will leave Jerusalem; survivors will come out of Mount Zion. The intense devotion of the Lord who commands armies will accomplish this.
ISA 37:33 So this is what the Lord says about the king of Assyria: ‘He will not enter this city, nor will he shoot an arrow here. He will not attack it with his shielded warriors, nor will he build siege works against it.
ISA 37:34 He will go back the way he came – he will not enter this city,’ says the Lord.
ISA 37:35 I will shield this city and rescue it for the sake of my reputation and because of my promise to David my servant.”’”
ISA 37:36 The Lord’s messenger went out and killed 185,000 troops in the Assyrian camp. When they got up early the next morning, there were all the corpses!
ISA 37:37 So King Sennacherib of Assyria broke camp and went on his way. He went home and stayed in Nineveh.
ISA 37:38 One day, as he was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer struck him down with the sword. They ran away to the land of Ararat; his son Esarhaddon replaced him as king.
ISA 38:1 In those days Hezekiah was stricken with a terminal illness. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz visited him and told him, “This is what the Lord says, ‘Give instructions to your household, for you are about to die; you will not get well.’”
ISA 38:2 Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the Lord,
ISA 38:3 “Please, Lord. Remember how I have served you faithfully and with wholehearted devotion, and how I have carried out your will.” Then Hezekiah wept bitterly.
ISA 38:4 The Lord told Isaiah,
ISA 38:5 “Go and tell Hezekiah: ‘This is what the Lord God of your ancestor David says: “I have heard your prayer; I have seen your tears. Look, I will add fifteen years to your life,
ISA 38:6 and rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria. I will shield this city.”’”
ISA 38:7 Isaiah replied, “This is your sign from the Lord confirming that the Lord will do what he has said:
ISA 38:8 Look, I will make the shadow go back ten steps on the stairs of Ahaz.” And then the shadow went back ten steps.
ISA 38:9 This is the prayer of King Hezekiah of Judah when he was sick and then recovered from his illness:
ISA 38:10 “I thought, ‘In the middle of my life I must walk through the gates of Sheol, I am deprived of the rest of my years.’
ISA 38:11 “I thought, ‘I will no longer see the Lord in the land of the living, I will no longer look on humankind with the inhabitants of the world.
ISA 38:12 My dwelling place is removed and taken away from me like a shepherd’s tent. I rolled up my life like a weaver rolls cloth; from the loom he cuts me off. You turn day into night and end my life.
ISA 38:13 I cry out until morning; like a lion he shatters all my bones; you turn day into night and end my life.
ISA 38:14 Like a swallow or a thrush I chirp, I coo like a dove; my eyes grow tired from looking up to the sky. O sovereign master, I am oppressed; help me!
ISA 38:15 What can I say? He has decreed and acted. I will walk slowly all my years because I am overcome with grief.
ISA 38:16 O sovereign master, your decrees can give men life; may years of life be restored to me. Restore my health and preserve my life.’
ISA 38:17 “Look, the grief I experienced was for my benefit. You delivered me from the pit of oblivion. For you removed all my sins from your sight.
ISA 38:18 Indeed Sheol does not give you thanks; death does not praise you. Those who descend into the pit do not anticipate your faithfulness.
ISA 38:19 The living person, the living person, he gives you thanks, as I do today. A father tells his sons about your faithfulness.
ISA 38:20 The Lord is about to deliver me, and we will celebrate with music for the rest of our lives in the Lord’s temple.”
ISA 38:21 Isaiah ordered, “Let them take a fig cake and apply it to the ulcerated sore and he will get well.”
ISA 38:22 Hezekiah said, “What is the confirming sign that I will go up to the Lord’s temple?”
ISA 39:1 At that time Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, for he heard that Hezekiah had been ill and had recovered.
ISA 39:2 Hezekiah welcomed them and showed them his storehouse with its silver, gold, spices, and high-quality olive oil, as well as his whole armory and everything in his treasuries. Hezekiah showed them everything in his palace and in his whole kingdom.
ISA 39:3 Isaiah the prophet visited King Hezekiah and asked him, “What did these men say? Where do they come from?” Hezekiah replied, “They come from the distant land of Babylon.”
ISA 39:4 Isaiah asked, “What have they seen in your palace?” Hezekiah replied, “They have seen everything in my palace. I showed them everything in my treasuries.”
ISA 39:5 Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Listen to the word of the Lord who commands armies:
ISA 39:6 ‘Look, a time is coming when everything in your palace and the things your ancestors have accumulated to this day will be carried away to Babylon; nothing will be left,’ says the Lord.
ISA 39:7 ‘Some of your very own descendants whom you father will be taken away and will be made eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”
ISA 39:8 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The Lord’s word which you have announced is appropriate.” Then he thought, “For there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
ISA 40:1 “Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God.
ISA 40:2 “Speak kindly to Jerusalem, and tell her that her time of warfare is over, that her punishment is completed. For the Lord has made her pay double for all her sins.”
ISA 40:3 A voice cries out, “In the wilderness clear a way for the Lord; construct in the desert a road for our God.
ISA 40:4 Every valley must be elevated, and every mountain and hill leveled. The rough terrain will become a level plain, the rugged landscape a wide valley.
ISA 40:5 The splendor of the Lord will be revealed, and all people will see it at the same time. For the Lord has decreed it.”
ISA 40:6 A voice says, “Cry out!” Another asks, “What should I cry out?” The first voice responds: “All people are like grass, and all their promises are like the flowers in the field.
ISA 40:7 The grass dries up, the flowers wither, when the wind sent by the Lord blows on them. Surely humanity is like grass.
ISA 40:8 The grass dries up, the flowers wither, but the decree of our God is forever reliable.”
ISA 40:9 Go up on a high mountain, O herald Zion! Shout out loudly, O herald Jerusalem! Shout, don’t be afraid! Say to the towns of Judah, “Here is your God!”
ISA 40:10 Look, the sovereign Lord comes as a victorious warrior; his military power establishes his rule. Look, his reward is with him; his prize goes before him.
ISA 40:11 Like a shepherd he tends his flock; he gathers up the lambs with his arm; he carries them close to his heart; he leads the ewes along.
ISA 40:12 Who has measured out the waters in the hollow of his hand, or carefully measured the sky, or carefully weighed the soil of the earth, or weighed the mountains in a balance, or the hills on scales?
ISA 40:13 Who comprehends the mind of the Lord, or gives him instruction as his counselor?
ISA 40:14 From whom does he receive directions? Who teaches him the correct way to do things, or imparts knowledge to him, or instructs him in skillful design?
ISA 40:15 Look, the nations are like a drop in a bucket; they are regarded as dust on the scales. He lifts the coastlands as if they were dust.
ISA 40:16 Not even Lebanon could supply enough firewood for a sacrifice; its wild animals would not provide enough burnt offerings.
ISA 40:17 All the nations are insignificant before him; they are regarded as absolutely nothing.
ISA 40:18 To whom can you compare God? To what image can you liken him?
ISA 40:19 A craftsman casts an idol; a metalsmith overlays it with gold and forges silver chains for it.
ISA 40:20 To make a contribution one selects wood that will not rot; he then seeks a skilled craftsman to make an idol that will not fall over.
ISA 40:21 Do you not know? Do you not hear? Has it not been told to you since the very beginning? Have you not understood from the time the earth’s foundations were made?
ISA 40:22 He is the one who sits on the earth’s horizon; its inhabitants are like grasshoppers before him. He is the one who stretches out the sky like a thin curtain, and spreads it out like a pitched tent.
ISA 40:23 He is the one who reduces rulers to nothing; he makes the earth’s leaders insignificant.
ISA 40:24 Indeed, they are barely planted; yes, they are barely sown; yes, they barely take root in the earth, and then he blows on them, causing them to dry up, and the wind carries them away like straw.
ISA 40:25 “To whom can you compare me? Whom do I resemble?” says the Holy One.
ISA 40:26 Look up at the sky! Who created all these heavenly lights? He is the one who leads out their ranks; he calls them all by name. Because of his absolute power and awesome strength, not one of them is missing.
ISA 40:27 Why do you say, Jacob, Why do you say, Israel, “The Lord is not aware of what is happening to me, My God is not concerned with my vindication”?
ISA 40:28 Do you not know? Have you not heard? The Lord is an eternal God, the creator of the whole earth. He does not get tired or weary; there is no limit to his wisdom.
ISA 40:29 He gives strength to those who are tired; to the ones who lack power, he gives renewed energy.
ISA 40:30 Even youths get tired and weary; even strong young men clumsily stumble.
ISA 40:31 But those who wait for the Lord’s help find renewed strength; they rise up as if they had eagles’ wings, they run without growing weary, they walk without getting tired.
ISA 41:1 “Listen to me in silence, you coastlands! Let the nations find renewed strength! Let them approach and then speak; let us come together for debate!
ISA 41:2 Who stirs up this one from the east? Who officially commissions him for service? He hands nations over to him, and enables him to subdue kings. He makes them like dust with his sword, like windblown straw with his bow.
ISA 41:3 He pursues them and passes by unharmed; he advances with great speed.
ISA 41:4 Who acts and carries out decrees? Who summons the successive generations from the beginning? I, the Lord, am present at the very beginning, and at the very end – I am the one.
ISA 41:5 The coastlands see and are afraid; the whole earth trembles; they approach and come.
ISA 41:6 They help one another; one says to the other, ‘Be strong!’
ISA 41:7 The craftsman encourages the metalsmith, the one who wields the hammer encourages the one who pounds on the anvil. He approves the quality of the welding, and nails it down so it won’t fall over.”
ISA 41:8 “You, my servant Israel, Jacob whom I have chosen, offspring of Abraham my friend,
ISA 41:9 you whom I am bringing back from the earth’s extremities, and have summoned from the remote regions – I told you, “You are my servant.” I have chosen you and not rejected you.
ISA 41:10 Don’t be afraid, for I am with you! Don’t be frightened, for I am your God! I strengthen you – yes, I help you – yes, I uphold you with my saving right hand!
ISA 41:11 Look, all who were angry at you will be ashamed and humiliated; your adversaries will be reduced to nothing and perish.
ISA 41:12 When you will look for your opponents, you will not find them; your enemies will be reduced to absolutely nothing.
ISA 41:13 For I am the Lord your God, the one who takes hold of your right hand, who says to you, ‘Don’t be afraid, I am helping you.’
ISA 41:14 Don’t be afraid, despised insignificant Jacob, men of Israel. I am helping you,” says the Lord, your protector, the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 41:15 “Look, I am making you like a sharp threshing sledge, new and double-edged. You will thresh the mountains and crush them; you will make the hills like straw.
ISA 41:16 You will winnow them and the wind will blow them away; the wind will scatter them. You will rejoice in the Lord; you will boast in the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 41:17 The oppressed and the poor look for water, but there is none; their tongues are parched from thirst. I, the Lord, will respond to their prayers; I, the God of Israel, will not abandon them.
ISA 41:18 I will make streams flow down the slopes and produce springs in the middle of the valleys. I will turn the desert into a pool of water and the arid land into springs.
ISA 41:19 I will make cedars, acacias, myrtles, and olive trees grow in the wilderness; I will make evergreens, firs, and cypresses grow together in the desert.
ISA 41:20 I will do this so people will observe and recognize, so they will pay attention and understand that the Lord’s power has accomplished this, and that the Holy One of Israel has brought it into being.”
ISA 41:21 “Present your argument,” says the Lord. “Produce your evidence,” says Jacob’s king.
ISA 41:22 “Let them produce evidence! Let them tell us what will happen! Tell us about your earlier predictive oracles, so we may examine them and see how they were fulfilled. Or decree for us some future events!
ISA 41:23 Predict how future events will turn out, so we might know you are gods. Yes, do something good or bad, so we might be frightened and in awe.
ISA 41:24 Look, you are nothing, and your accomplishments are nonexistent; the one who chooses to worship you is disgusting.
ISA 41:25 I have stirred up one out of the north and he advances, one from the eastern horizon who prays in my name. He steps on rulers as if they were clay, like a potter treading the clay.
ISA 41:26 Who decreed this from the beginning, so we could know? Who announced it ahead of time, so we could say, ‘He’s correct’? Indeed, none of them decreed it! Indeed, none of them announced it! Indeed, no one heard you say anything!
ISA 41:27 I first decreed to Zion, ‘Look, here’s what will happen!’ I sent a herald to Jerusalem.
ISA 41:28 I look, but there is no one, among them there is no one who serves as an adviser, that I might ask questions and receive answers.
ISA 41:29 Look, all of them are nothing, their accomplishments are nonexistent; their metal images lack any real substance.
ISA 42:1 “Here is my servant whom I support, my chosen one in whom I take pleasure. I have placed my spirit on him; he will make just decrees for the nations.
ISA 42:2 He will not cry out or shout; he will not publicize himself in the streets.
ISA 42:3 A crushed reed he will not break, a dim wick he will not extinguish; he will faithfully make just decrees.
ISA 42:4 He will not grow dim or be crushed before establishing justice on the earth; the coastlands will wait in anticipation for his decrees.”
ISA 42:5 This is what the true God, the Lord, says – the one who created the sky and stretched it out, the one who fashioned the earth and everything that lives on it, the one who gives breath to the people on it, and life to those who live on it:
ISA 42:6 “I, the Lord, officially commission you; I take hold of your hand. I protect you and make you a covenant mediator for people, and a light to the nations,
ISA 42:7 to open blind eyes, to release prisoners from dungeons, those who live in darkness from prisons.
ISA 42:8 I am the Lord! That is my name! I will not share my glory with anyone else, or the praise due me with idols.
ISA 42:9 Look, my earlier predictive oracles have come to pass; now I announce new events. Before they begin to occur, I reveal them to you.”
ISA 42:10 Sing to the Lord a brand new song! Praise him from the horizon of the earth, you who go down to the sea, and everything that lives in it, you coastlands and those who live there!
ISA 42:11 Let the desert and its cities shout out, the towns where the nomads of Kedar live! Let the residents of Sela shout joyfully; let them shout loudly from the mountaintops.
ISA 42:12 Let them give the Lord the honor he deserves; let them praise his deeds in the coastlands.
ISA 42:13 The Lord emerges like a hero, like a warrior he inspires himself for battle; he shouts, yes, he yells, he shows his enemies his power.
ISA 42:14 “I have been inactive for a long time; I kept quiet and held back. Like a woman in labor I groan; I pant and gasp.
ISA 42:15 I will make the trees on the mountains and hills wither up; I will dry up all their vegetation. I will turn streams into islands, and dry up pools of water.
ISA 42:16 I will lead the blind along an unfamiliar way; I will guide them down paths they have never traveled. I will turn the darkness in front of them into light, and level out the rough ground. This is what I will do for them. I will not abandon them.
ISA 42:17 Those who trust in idols will turn back and be utterly humiliated, those who say to metal images, ‘You are our gods.’”
ISA 42:18 “Listen, you deaf ones! Take notice, you blind ones!
ISA 42:19 My servant is truly blind, my messenger is truly deaf. My covenant partner, the servant of the Lord, is truly blind.
ISA 42:20 You see many things, but don’t comprehend; their ears are open, but do not hear.”
ISA 42:21 The Lord wanted to exhibit his justice by magnifying his law and displaying it.
ISA 42:22 But these people are looted and plundered; all of them are trapped in pits and held captive in prisons. They were carried away as loot with no one to rescue them; they were carried away as plunder, and no one says, “Bring that back!”
ISA 42:23 Who among you will pay attention to this? Who will listen attentively in the future?
ISA 42:24 Who handed Jacob over to the robber? Who handed Israel over to the looters? Was it not the Lord, against whom we sinned? They refused to follow his commands; they disobeyed his law.
ISA 42:25 So he poured out his fierce anger on them, along with the devastation of war. Its flames encircled them, but they did not realize it; it burned against them, but they did notice.
ISA 43:1 Now, this is what the Lord says, the one who created you, O Jacob, and formed you, O Israel: “Don’t be afraid, for I will protect you. I call you by name, you are mine.
ISA 43:2 When you pass through the waters, I am with you; when you pass through the streams, they will not overwhelm you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be burned; the flames will not harm you.
ISA 43:3 For I am the Lord your God, the Holy One of Israel, your deliverer. I have handed over Egypt as a ransom price, Ethiopia and Seba in place of you.
ISA 43:4 Since you are precious and special in my sight, and I love you, I will hand over people in place of you, nations in place of your life.
ISA 43:5 Don’t be afraid, for I am with you. From the east I will bring your descendants; from the west I will gather you.
ISA 43:6 I will say to the north, ‘Hand them over!’ and to the south, ‘Don’t hold any back!’ Bring my sons from distant lands, and my daughters from the remote regions of the earth,
ISA 43:7 everyone who belongs to me, whom I created for my glory, whom I formed – yes, whom I made!
ISA 43:8 Bring out the people who are blind, even though they have eyes, those who are deaf, even though they have ears!
ISA 43:9 All nations gather together, the peoples assemble. Who among them announced this? Who predicted earlier events for us? Let them produce their witnesses to testify they were right; let them listen and affirm, ‘It is true.’
ISA 43:10 You are my witnesses,” says the Lord, “my servant whom I have chosen, so that you may consider and believe in me, and understand that I am he. No god was formed before me, and none will outlive me.
ISA 43:11 I, I am the Lord, and there is no deliverer besides me.
ISA 43:12 I decreed and delivered and proclaimed, and there was no other god among you. You are my witnesses,” says the Lord, “that I am God.
ISA 43:13 From this day forward I am he; no one can deliver from my power; I will act, and who can prevent it?”
ISA 43:14 This is what the LORD says, your protector, the Holy One of Israel: “For your sake I send to Babylon and make them all fugitives, turning the Babylonians' joyful shouts into mourning songs.
ISA 43:15 I am the LORD, your Holy One, the one who created Israel, your king.”
ISA 43:16 This is what the LORD says, the one who made a road through the sea, a pathway through the surging waters,
ISA 43:17 the one who led chariots and horses to destruction, together with a mighty army. They fell down, never to rise again; they were extinguished, put out like a burning wick:
ISA 43:18 “Don't remember these earlier events; don't recall these former events.
ISA 43:19 “Look, I am about to do something new. Now it begins to happen! Do you not recognize it? Yes, I will make a road in the desert and paths in the wilderness.
ISA 43:20 The wild animals of the desert honor me, the jackals and ostriches, because I put water in the desert and streams in the wilderness, to quench the thirst of my chosen people,
ISA 43:21 the people whom I formed for myself, so they might praise me.”
ISA 43:22 “But you did not call for me, O Jacob; you did not long for me, O Israel.
ISA 43:23 You did not bring me lambs for your burnt offerings; you did not honor me with your sacrifices. I did not burden you with offerings; I did not make you weary by demanding incense.
ISA 43:24 You did not buy me aromatic reeds; you did not present to me the fat of your sacrifices. Yet you burdened me with your sins; you made me weary with your evil deeds.
ISA 43:25 I, I am the one who blots out your rebellious deeds for my sake; your sins I do not remember.
ISA 43:26 Remind me of what happened! Let's debate! You, prove to me that you are right!
ISA 43:27 The father of your nation sinned; your spokesmen rebelled against me.
ISA 43:28 So I defiled your holy princes, and handed Jacob over to destruction, and subjected Israel to humiliating abuse.”
ISA 44:1 “Now, listen, Jacob my servant, Israel whom I have chosen!”
ISA 44:2 This is what the Lord, the one who made you, says – the one who formed you in the womb and helps you: “Don’t be afraid, my servant Jacob, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen!
ISA 44:3 For I will pour water on the parched ground and cause streams to flow on the dry land. I will pour my spirit on your offspring and my blessing on your children.
ISA 44:4 They will sprout up like a tree in the grass, like poplars beside channels of water.
ISA 44:5 One will say, ‘I belong to the Lord,’ and another will use the name ‘Jacob.’ One will write on his hand, ‘The Lord’s,’ and use the name ‘Israel.’”
ISA 44:6 This is what the Lord, Israel’s king, says, their protector, the Lord who commands armies: “I am the first and I am the last, there is no God but me.
ISA 44:7 Who is like me? Let him make his claim! Let him announce it and explain it to me – since I established an ancient people – let them announce future events!
ISA 44:8 Don’t panic! Don’t be afraid! Did I not tell you beforehand and decree it? You are my witnesses! Is there any God but me? There is no other sheltering rock; I know of none.
ISA 44:9 All who form idols are nothing; the things in which they delight are worthless. Their witnesses cannot see; they recognize nothing, so they are put to shame.
ISA 44:10 Who forms a god and casts an idol that will prove worthless?
ISA 44:11 Look, all his associates will be put to shame; the craftsmen are mere humans. Let them all assemble and take their stand! They will panic and be put to shame.
ISA 44:12 A blacksmith works with his tool and forges metal over the coals. He forms it with hammers; he makes it with his strong arm. He gets hungry and loses his energy; he drinks no water and gets tired.
ISA 44:13 A carpenter takes measurements; he marks out an outline of its form; he scrapes it with chisels, and marks it with a compass. He patterns it after the human form, like a well-built human being, and puts it in a shrine.
ISA 44:14 He cuts down cedars and acquires a cypress or an oak. He gets trees from the forest; he plants a cedar and the rain makes it grow.
ISA 44:15 A man uses it to make a fire; he takes some of it and warms himself. Yes, he kindles a fire and bakes bread. Then he makes a god and worships it; he makes an idol and bows down to it.
ISA 44:16 Half of it he burns in the fire – over that half he cooks meat; he roasts a meal and fills himself. Yes, he warms himself and says, ‘Ah! I am warm as I look at the fire.’
ISA 44:17 With the rest of it he makes a god, his idol; he bows down to it and worships it. He prays to it, saying, ‘Rescue me, for you are my god!’
ISA 44:18 They do not comprehend or understand, for their eyes are blind and cannot see; their minds do not discern.
ISA 44:19 No one thinks to himself, nor do they comprehend or understand and say to themselves: ‘I burned half of it in the fire – yes, I baked bread over the coals; I roasted meat and ate it. With the rest of it should I make a disgusting idol? Should I bow down to dry wood?’
ISA 44:20 He feeds on ashes; his deceived mind misleads him. He cannot rescue himself, nor does he say, ‘Is this not a false god I hold in my right hand?’
ISA 44:21 Remember these things, O Jacob, O Israel, for you are my servant. I formed you to be my servant; O Israel, I will not forget you!
ISA 44:22 I remove the guilt of your rebellious deeds as if they were a cloud, the guilt of your sins as if they were a cloud. Come back to me, for I protect you.”
ISA 44:23 Shout for joy, O sky, for the Lord intervenes; shout out, you subterranean regions of the earth. O mountains, give a joyful shout; you too, O forest and all your trees! For the Lord protects Jacob; he reveals his splendor through Israel.
ISA 44:24 This is what the Lord, your protector, says, the one who formed you in the womb: “I am the Lord, who made everything, who alone stretched out the sky, who fashioned the earth all by myself,
ISA 44:25 who frustrates the omens of the empty talkers and humiliates the omen readers, who overturns the counsel of the wise men and makes their advice seem foolish,
ISA 44:26 who fulfills the oracles of his prophetic servants and brings to pass the announcements of his messengers, who says about Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited,’ and about the towns of Judah, ‘They will be rebuilt, her ruins I will raise up,’
ISA 44:27 who says to the deep sea, ‘Be dry! I will dry up your sea currents,’
ISA 44:28 who commissions Cyrus, the one I appointed as shepherd to carry out all my wishes and to decree concerning Jerusalem, ‘She will be rebuilt,’ and concerning the temple, ‘It will be reconstructed.’”
ISA 45:1 This is what the Lord says to his chosen one, to Cyrus, whose right hand I hold in order to subdue nations before him, and disarm kings, to open doors before him, so gates remain unclosed:
ISA 45:2 “I will go before you and level mountains. Bronze doors I will shatter and iron bars I will hack through.
ISA 45:3 I will give you hidden treasures, riches stashed away in secret places, so you may recognize that I am the Lord, the one who calls you by name, the God of Israel.
ISA 45:4 For the sake of my servant Jacob, Israel, my chosen one, I call you by name and give you a title of respect, even though you do not recognize me.
ISA 45:5 I am the Lord, I have no peer, there is no God but me. I arm you for battle, even though you do not recognize me.
ISA 45:6 I do this so people will recognize from east to west that there is no God but me; I am the Lord, I have no peer.
ISA 45:7 I am the one who forms light and creates darkness; the one who brings about peace and creates calamity. I am the Lord, who accomplishes all these things.
ISA 45:8 O sky, rain down from above! Let the clouds send down showers of deliverance! Let the earth absorb it so salvation may grow, and deliverance may sprout up along with it. I, the Lord, create it.
ISA 45:9 One who argues with his creator is in grave danger, one who is like a mere shard among the other shards on the ground! The clay should not say to the potter, “What in the world are you doing? Your work lacks skill!”
ISA 45:10 Danger awaits one who says to his father, “What in the world are you fathering?” and to his mother, “What in the world are you bringing forth?”
ISA 45:11 This is what the Lord says, the Holy One of Israel, the one who formed him, concerning things to come: “How dare you question me about my children! How dare you tell me what to do with the work of my own hands!
ISA 45:12 I made the earth, I created the people who live on it. It was me – my hands stretched out the sky, I give orders to all the heavenly lights.
ISA 45:13 It is me – I stir him up and commission him; I will make all his ways level. He will rebuild my city; he will send my exiled people home, but not for a price or a bribe,” says the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 45:14 This is what the Lord says: “The profit of Egypt and the revenue of Ethiopia, along with the Sabeans, those tall men, will be brought to you and become yours. They will walk behind you, coming along in chains. They will bow down to you and pray to you: ‘Truly God is with you; he has no peer; there is no other God!’”
ISA 45:15 Yes, you are a God who keeps hidden, O God of Israel, deliverer!
ISA 45:16 They will all be ashamed and embarrassed; those who fashion idols will all be humiliated.
ISA 45:17 Israel will be delivered once and for all by the Lord; you will never again be ashamed or humiliated.
ISA 45:18 For this is what the Lord says, the one who created the sky – he is the true God, the one who formed the earth and made it; he established it, he did not create it without order, he formed it to be inhabited – “I am the Lord, I have no peer.
ISA 45:19 I have not spoken in secret, in some hidden place. I did not tell Jacob’s descendants, ‘Seek me in vain!’ I am the Lord, the one who speaks honestly, who makes reliable announcements.
ISA 45:20 Gather together and come! Approach together, you refugees from the nations! Those who carry wooden idols know nothing, those who pray to a god that cannot deliver.
ISA 45:21 Tell me! Present the evidence! Let them consult with one another! Who predicted this in the past? Who announced it beforehand? Was it not I, the Lord? I have no peer, there is no God but me, a God who vindicates and delivers; there is none but me.
ISA 45:22 Turn to me so you can be delivered, all you who live in the earth’s remote regions! For I am God, and I have no peer.
ISA 45:23 I solemnly make this oath – what I say is true and reliable: ‘Surely every knee will bow to me, every tongue will solemnly affirm;
ISA 45:24 they will say about me, “Yes, the Lord is a powerful deliverer.”’” All who are angry at him will cower before him.
ISA 45:25 All the descendants of Israel will be vindicated by the Lord and will boast in him.
ISA 46:1 Bel kneels down, Nebo bends low. Their images weigh down animals and beasts. Your heavy images are burdensome to tired animals.
ISA 46:2 Together they bend low and kneel down; they are unable to rescue the images; they themselves head off into captivity.
ISA 46:3 “Listen to me, O family of Jacob, all you who are left from the family of Israel, you who have been carried from birth, you who have been supported from the time you left the womb.
ISA 46:4 Even when you are old, I will take care of you, even when you have gray hair, I will carry you. I made you and I will support you; I will carry you and rescue you.
ISA 46:5 To whom can you compare and liken me? Tell me whom you think I resemble, so we can be compared!
ISA 46:6 Those who empty out gold from a purse and weigh out silver on the scale hire a metalsmith, who makes it into a god. They then bow down and worship it.
ISA 46:7 They put it on their shoulder and carry it; they put it in its place and it just stands there; it does not move from its place. Even when someone cries out to it, it does not reply; it does not deliver him from his distress.
ISA 46:8 Remember this, so you can be brave! Think about it, you rebels!
ISA 46:9 Remember what I accomplished in antiquity! Truly I am God, I have no peer; I am God, and there is none like me,
ISA 46:10 who announces the end from the beginning and reveals beforehand what has not yet occurred, who says, ‘My plan will be realized, I will accomplish what I desire,’
ISA 46:11 who summons an eagle from the east, from a distant land, one who carries out my plan. Yes, I have decreed, yes, I will bring it to pass; I have formulated a plan, yes, I will carry it out.
ISA 46:12 Listen to me, you stubborn people, you who distance yourself from doing what is right.
ISA 46:13 I am bringing my deliverance near, it is not far away; I am bringing my salvation near, it does not wait. I will save Zion; I will adorn Israel with my splendor.”
ISA 47:1 “Fall down! Sit in the dirt, O virgin daughter Babylon! Sit on the ground, not on a throne, O daughter of the Babylonians! Indeed, you will no longer be called delicate and pampered.
ISA 47:2 Pick up millstones and grind flour! Remove your veil, strip off your skirt, expose your legs, cross the streams!
ISA 47:3 Let your private parts be exposed! Your genitals will be on display! I will get revenge; I will not have pity on anyone,”
ISA 47:4 says our protector – the Lord who commands armies is his name, the Holy One of Israel.
ISA 47:5 “Sit silently! Go to a hiding place, O daughter of the Babylonians! Indeed, you will no longer be called ‘Queen of kingdoms.’
ISA 47:6 I was angry at my people; I defiled my special possession and handed them over to you. You showed them no mercy; you even placed a very heavy burden on old people.
ISA 47:7 You said, ‘I will rule forever as permanent queen!’ You did not think about these things; you did not consider how it would turn out.
ISA 47:8 So now, listen to this, O one who lives so lavishly, who lives securely, who says to herself, ‘I am unique! No one can compare to me! I will never have to live as a widow; I will never lose my children.’
ISA 47:9 Both of these will come upon you suddenly, in one day! You will lose your children and be widowed. You will be overwhelmed by these tragedies, despite your many incantations and your numerous amulets.
ISA 47:10 You were complacent in your evil deeds; you thought, ‘No one sees me.’ Your self-professed wisdom and knowledge lead you astray, when you say, ‘I am unique! No one can compare to me!’
ISA 47:11 Disaster will overtake you; you will not know how to charm it away. Destruction will fall on you; you will not be able to appease it. Calamity will strike you suddenly, before you recognize it.
ISA 47:12 Persist in trusting your amulets and your many incantations, which you have faithfully recited since your youth! Maybe you will be successful – maybe you will scare away disaster.
ISA 47:13 You are tired out from listening to so much advice. Let them take their stand – the ones who see omens in the sky, who gaze at the stars, who make monthly predictions – let them rescue you from the disaster that is about to overtake you!
ISA 47:14 Look, they are like straw, which the fire burns up; they cannot rescue themselves from the heat of the flames. There are no coals to warm them, no firelight to enjoy.
ISA 47:15 They will disappoint you, those you have so faithfully dealt with since your youth. Each strays off in his own direction, leaving no one to rescue you.”
ISA 48:1 Listen to this, O family of Jacob, you who are called by the name ‘Israel,’ and are descended from Judah, who take oaths in the name of the Lord, and invoke the God of Israel – but not in an honest and just manner.
ISA 48:2 Indeed, they live in the holy city; they trust in the God of Israel, whose name is the Lord who commands armies.
ISA 48:3 “I announced events beforehand, I issued the decrees and made the predictions; suddenly I acted and they came to pass.
ISA 48:4 I did this because I know how stubborn you are. Your neck muscles are like iron and your forehead like bronze.
ISA 48:5 I announced them to you beforehand; before they happened, I predicted them for you, so you could never say, ‘My image did these things, my idol, my cast image, decreed them.’
ISA 48:6 You have heard; now look at all the evidence! Will you not admit that what I say is true? From this point on I am announcing to you new events that are previously unrevealed and you do not know about.
ISA 48:7 Now they come into being, not in the past; before today you did not hear about them, so you could not say, ‘Yes, I know about them.’
ISA 48:8 You did not hear, you do not know, you were not told beforehand. For I know that you are very deceitful; you were labeled a rebel from birth.
ISA 48:9 For the sake of my reputation I hold back my anger; for the sake of my prestige I restrain myself from destroying you.
ISA 48:10 Look, I have refined you, but not as silver; I have purified you in the furnace of misery.
ISA 48:11 For my sake alone I will act, for how can I allow my name to be defiled? I will not share my glory with anyone else!
ISA 48:12 Listen to me, O Jacob, Israel, whom I summoned! I am the one; I am present at the very beginning and at the very end.
ISA 48:13 Yes, my hand founded the earth; my right hand spread out the sky. I summon them; they stand together.
ISA 48:14 All of you, gather together and listen! Who among them announced these things? The Lord’s ally will carry out his desire against Babylon; he will exert his power against the Babylonians.
ISA 48:15 I, I have spoken – yes, I have summoned him; I lead him and he will succeed.
ISA 48:16 Approach me! Listen to this! From the very first I have not spoken in secret; when it happens, I am there.” So now, the sovereign Lord has sent me, accompanied by his spirit.
ISA 48:17 This is what the Lord, your protector, says, the Holy One of Israel: “I am the Lord your God, who teaches you how to succeed, who leads you in the way you should go.
ISA 48:18 If only you had obeyed my commandments, prosperity would have flowed to you like a river, deliverance would have come to you like the waves of the sea.
ISA 48:19 Your descendants would have been as numerous as sand, and your children like its granules. Their name would not have been cut off and eliminated from my presence.
ISA 48:20 Leave Babylon! Flee from the Babylonians! Announce it with a shout of joy! Make this known! Proclaim it throughout the earth! Say, ‘The Lord protects his servant Jacob.
ISA 48:21 They do not thirst as he leads them through dry regions; he makes water flow out of a rock for them; he splits open a rock and water flows out.’
ISA 48:22 There will be no prosperity for the wicked,” says the Lord.
ISA 49:1 Listen to me, you coastlands! Pay attention, you people who live far away! The Lord summoned me from birth; he commissioned me when my mother brought me into the world.
ISA 49:2 He made my mouth like a sharp sword, he hid me in the hollow of his hand; he made me like a sharpened arrow, he hid me in his quiver.
ISA 49:3 He said to me, “You are my servant, Israel, through whom I will reveal my splendor.”
ISA 49:4 But I thought, “I have worked in vain; I have expended my energy for absolutely nothing.” But the Lord will vindicate me; my God will reward me.
ISA 49:5 So now the Lord says, the one who formed me from birth to be his servant – he did this to restore Jacob to himself, so that Israel might be gathered to him; and I will be honored in the Lord’s sight, for my God is my source of strength –
ISA 49:6 he says, “Is it too insignificant a task for you to be my servant, to reestablish the tribes of Jacob, and restore the remnant of Israel? I will make you a light to the nations, so you can bring my deliverance to the remote regions of the earth.”
ISA 49:7 This is what the Lord, the protector of Israel, their Holy One, says to the one who is despised and rejected by nations, a servant of rulers: “Kings will see and rise in respect, princes will bow down, because of the faithful Lord, the Holy One of Israel who has chosen you.”
ISA 49:8 This is what the Lord says: “At the time I decide to show my favor, I will respond to you; in the day of deliverance I will help you; I will protect you and make you a covenant mediator for people, to rebuild the land and to reassign the desolate property.
ISA 49:9 You will say to the prisoners, ‘Come out,’ and to those who are in dark dungeons, ‘Emerge.’ They will graze beside the roads; on all the slopes they will find pasture.
ISA 49:10 They will not be hungry or thirsty; the sun’s oppressive heat will not beat down on them, for one who has compassion on them will guide them; he will lead them to springs of water.
ISA 49:11 I will make all my mountains into a road; I will construct my roadways.”
ISA 49:12 Look, they come from far away! Look, some come from the north and west, and others from the land of Sinim!
ISA 49:13 Shout for joy, O sky! Rejoice, O earth! Let the mountains give a joyful shout! For the Lord consoles his people and shows compassion to the oppressed.
ISA 49:14 “Zion said, ‘The Lord has abandoned me, the sovereign master has forgotten me.’
ISA 49:15 Can a woman forget her baby who nurses at her breast? Can she withhold compassion from the child she has borne? Even if mothers were to forget, I could never forget you!
ISA 49:16 Look, I have inscribed your name on my palms; your walls are constantly before me.
ISA 49:17 Your children hurry back, while those who destroyed and devastated you depart.
ISA 49:18 Look all around you! All of them gather to you. As surely as I live,” says the Lord, “you will certainly wear all of them like jewelry; you will put them on as if you were a bride.
ISA 49:19 Yes, your land lies in ruins; it is desolate and devastated. But now you will be too small to hold your residents, and those who devoured you will be far away.
ISA 49:20 Yet the children born during your time of bereavement will say within your hearing, ‘This place is too cramped for us, make room for us so we can live here.’
ISA 49:21 Then you will think to yourself, ‘Who bore these children for me? I was bereaved and barren, dismissed and divorced. Who raised these children? Look, I was left all alone; where did these children come from?’”
ISA 49:22 This is what the sovereign Lord says: “Look I will raise my hand to the nations; I will raise my signal flag to the peoples. They will bring your sons in their arms and carry your daughters on their shoulders.
ISA 49:23 Kings will be your children’s guardians; their princesses will nurse your children. With their faces to the ground they will bow down to you and they will lick the dirt on your feet. Then you will recognize that I am the Lord; those who wait patiently for me are not put to shame.
ISA 49:24 Can spoils be taken from a warrior, or captives be rescued from a conqueror?
ISA 49:25 Indeed,” says the Lord, “captives will be taken from a warrior; spoils will be rescued from a conqueror. I will oppose your adversary and I will rescue your children.
ISA 49:26 I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh; they will get drunk on their own blood, as if it were wine. Then all humankind will recognize that I am the Lord, your deliverer, your protector, the powerful ruler of Jacob.”
ISA 50:1 This is what the Lord says: “Where is your mother’s divorce certificate by which I divorced her? Or to which of my creditors did I sell you? Look, you were sold because of your sins; because of your rebellious acts I divorced your mother.
ISA 50:2 Why does no one challenge me when I come? Why does no one respond when I call? Is my hand too weak to deliver you? Do I lack the power to rescue you? Look, with a mere shout I can dry up the sea; I can turn streams into a desert, so the fish rot away and die from lack of water.
ISA 50:3 I can clothe the sky in darkness; I can cover it with sackcloth.”
ISA 50:4 The sovereign Lord has given me the capacity to be his spokesman, so that I know how to help the weary. He wakes me up every morning; he makes me alert so I can listen attentively as disciples do.
ISA 50:5 The sovereign Lord has spoken to me clearly; I have not rebelled, I have not turned back.
ISA 50:6 I offered my back to those who attacked, my jaws to those who tore out my beard; I did not hide my face from insults and spitting.
ISA 50:7 But the sovereign Lord helps me, so I am not humiliated. For that reason I am steadfastly resolved; I know I will not be put to shame.
ISA 50:8 The one who vindicates me is close by. Who dares to argue with me? Let us confront each other! Who is my accuser? Let him challenge me!
ISA 50:9 Look, the sovereign Lord helps me. Who dares to condemn me? Look, all of them will wear out like clothes; a moth will eat away at them.
ISA 50:10 Who among you fears the Lord? Who obeys his servant? Whoever walks in deep darkness, without light, should trust in the name of the Lord and rely on his God.
ISA 50:11 Look, all of you who start a fire and who equip yourselves with flaming arrows, walk in the light of the fire you started and among the flaming arrows you ignited! This is what you will receive from me: you will lie down in a place of pain.
ISA 51:1 “Listen to me, you who pursue godliness, who seek the Lord! Look at the rock from which you were chiseled, at the quarry from which you were dug!
ISA 51:2 Look at Abraham, your father, and Sarah, who gave you birth. When I summoned him, he was a lone individual, but I blessed him and gave him numerous descendants.
ISA 51:3 Certainly the Lord will console Zion; he will console all her ruins. He will make her wilderness like Eden, her desert like the Garden of the Lord. Happiness and joy will be restored to her, thanksgiving and the sound of music.
ISA 51:4 Pay attention to me, my people! Listen to me, my people! For I will issue a decree, I will make my justice a light to the nations.
ISA 51:5 I am ready to vindicate, I am ready to deliver, I will establish justice among the nations. The coastlands wait patiently for me; they wait in anticipation for the revelation of my power.
ISA 51:6 Look up at the sky! Look at the earth below! For the sky will dissipate like smoke, and the earth will wear out like clothes; its residents will die like gnats. But the deliverance I give is permanent; the vindication I provide will not disappear.
ISA 51:7 Listen to me, you who know what is right, you people who are aware of my law! Don’t be afraid of the insults of men; don’t be discouraged because of their abuse!
ISA 51:8 For a moth will eat away at them like clothes; a clothes moth will devour them like wool. But the vindication I provide will be permanent; the deliverance I give will last.”
ISA 51:9 Wake up! Wake up! Clothe yourself with strength, O arm of the Lord! Wake up as in former times, as in antiquity! Did you not smash the Proud One? Did you not wound the sea monster?
ISA 51:10 Did you not dry up the sea, the waters of the great deep? Did you not make a path through the depths of the sea, so those delivered from bondage could cross over?
ISA 51:11 Those whom the Lord has ransomed will return; they will enter Zion with a happy shout. Unending joy will crown them, happiness and joy will overwhelm them; grief and suffering will disappear.
ISA 51:12 “I, I am the one who consoles you. Why are you afraid of mortal men, of mere human beings who are as short-lived as grass?
ISA 51:13 Why do you forget the Lord, who made you, who stretched out the sky and founded the earth? Why do you constantly tremble all day long at the anger of the oppressor, when he makes plans to destroy? Where is the anger of the oppressor?
ISA 51:14 The one who suffers will soon be released; he will not die in prison, he will not go hungry.
ISA 51:15 I am the Lord your God, who churns up the sea so that its waves surge. The Lord who commands armies is his name!
ISA 51:16 I commission you as my spokesman; I cover you with the palm of my hand, to establish the sky and to found the earth, to say to Zion, ‘You are my people.’”
ISA 51:17 Wake up! Wake up! Get up, O Jerusalem! You drank from the cup the Lord passed to you, which was full of his anger! You drained dry the goblet full of intoxicating wine.
ISA 51:18 There was no one to lead her among all the children she bore; there was no one to take her by the hand among all the children she raised.
ISA 51:19 These double disasters confronted you. But who feels sorry for you? Destruction and devastation, famine and sword. But who consoles you?
ISA 51:20 Your children faint; they lie at the head of every street like an antelope in a snare. They are left in a stupor by the Lord’s anger, by the battle cry of your God.
ISA 51:21 So listen to this, oppressed one, who is drunk, but not from wine!
ISA 51:22 This is what your sovereign master, the Lord your God, says: “Look, I have removed from your hand the cup of intoxicating wine, the goblet full of my anger. You will no longer have to drink it.
ISA 51:23 I will put it into the hand of your tormentors who said to you, ‘Lie down, so we can walk over you.’ You made your back like the ground, and like the street for those who walked over you.”
ISA 52:1 Wake up! Wake up! Clothe yourself with strength, O Zion! Put on your beautiful clothes, O Jerusalem, holy city! For uncircumcised and unclean pagans will no longer invade you.
ISA 52:2 Shake off the dirt! Get up, captive Jerusalem! Take off the iron chains around your neck, O captive daughter Zion!
ISA 52:3 For this is what the Lord says: “You were sold for nothing, and you will not be redeemed for money.”
ISA 52:4 For this is what the sovereign Lord says: “In the beginning my people went to live temporarily in Egypt; Assyria oppressed them for no good reason.
ISA 52:5 And now, what do we have here?” says the Lord. “Indeed my people have been carried away for nothing, those who rule over them taunt,” says the Lord, “and my name is constantly slandered all day long.
ISA 52:6 For this reason my people will know my name, for this reason they will know at that time that I am the one who says, ‘Here I am.’”
ISA 52:7 How delightful it is to see approaching over the mountains the feet of a messenger who announces peace, a messenger who brings good news, who announces deliverance, who says to Zion, “Your God reigns!”
ISA 52:8 Listen, your watchmen shout; in unison they shout for joy, for they see with their very own eyes the Lord’s return to Zion.
ISA 52:9 In unison give a joyful shout, O ruins of Jerusalem! For the Lord consoles his people; he protects Jerusalem.
ISA 52:10 The Lord reveals his royal power in the sight of all the nations; the entire earth sees our God deliver.
ISA 52:11 Leave! Leave! Get out of there! Don’t touch anything unclean! Get out of it! Stay pure, you who carry the Lord’s holy items!
ISA 52:12 Yet do not depart quickly or leave in a panic. For the Lord goes before you; the God of Israel is your rear guard.
ISA 52:13 “Look, my servant will succeed! He will be elevated, lifted high, and greatly exalted –
ISA 52:14 (just as many were horrified by the sight of you) he was so disfigured he no longer looked like a man;
ISA 52:15 his form was so marred he no longer looked human – so now he will startle many nations. Kings will be shocked by his exaltation, for they will witness something unannounced to them, and they will understand something they had not heard about.
ISA 53:1 Who would have believed what we just heard? When was the Lord’s power revealed through him?
ISA 53:2 He sprouted up like a twig before God, like a root out of parched soil; he had no stately form or majesty that might catch our attention, no special appearance that we should want to follow him.
ISA 53:3 He was despised and rejected by people, one who experienced pain and was acquainted with illness; people hid their faces from him; he was despised, and we considered him insignificant.
ISA 53:4 But he lifted up our illnesses, he carried our pain; even though we thought he was being punished, attacked by God, and afflicted for something he had done.
ISA 53:5 He was wounded because of our rebellious deeds, crushed because of our sins; he endured punishment that made us well; because of his wounds we have been healed.
ISA 53:6 All of us had wandered off like sheep; each of us had strayed off on his own path, but the Lord caused the sin of all of us to attack him.
ISA 53:7 He was treated harshly and afflicted, but he did not even open his mouth. Like a lamb led to the slaughtering block, like a sheep silent before her shearers, he did not even open his mouth.
ISA 53:8 He was led away after an unjust trial – but who even cared? Indeed, he was cut off from the land of the living; because of the rebellion of his own people he was wounded.
ISA 53:9 They intended to bury him with criminals, but he ended up in a rich man’s tomb, because he had committed no violent deeds, nor had he spoken deceitfully.
ISA 53:10 Though the Lord desired to crush him and make him ill, once restitution is made, he will see descendants and enjoy long life, and the Lord’s purpose will be accomplished through him.
ISA 53:11 Having suffered, he will reflect on his work, he will be satisfied when he understands what he has done. “My servant will acquit many, for he carried their sins.
ISA 53:12 So I will assign him a portion with the multitudes, he will divide the spoils of victory with the powerful, because he willingly submitted to death and was numbered with the rebels, when he lifted up the sin of many and intervened on behalf of the rebels.”
ISA 54:1 “Shout for joy, O barren one who has not given birth! Give a joyful shout and cry out, you who have not been in labor! For the children of the desolate one are more numerous than the children of the married woman,” says the Lord.
ISA 54:2 Make your tent larger, stretch your tent curtains farther out! Spare no effort, lengthen your ropes, and pound your stakes deep.
ISA 54:3 For you will spread out to the right and to the left; your children will conquer nations and will resettle desolate cities.
ISA 54:4 Don’t be afraid, for you will not be put to shame! Don’t be intimidated, for you will not be humiliated! You will forget about the shame you experienced in your youth; you will no longer remember the disgrace of your abandonment.
ISA 54:5 For your husband is the one who made you – the Lord who commands armies is his name. He is your protector, the Holy One of Israel. He is called “God of the entire earth.”
ISA 54:6 “Indeed, the Lord will call you back like a wife who has been abandoned and suffers from depression, like a young wife when she has been rejected,” says your God.
ISA 54:7 “For a short time I abandoned you, but with great compassion I will gather you.
ISA 54:8 In a burst of anger I rejected you momentarily, but with lasting devotion I will have compassion on you,” says your protector, the Lord.
ISA 54:9 “As far as I am concerned, this is like in Noah’s time, when I vowed that the waters of Noah’s flood would never again cover the earth. In the same way I have vowed that I will not be angry at you or shout at you.
ISA 54:10 Even if the mountains are removed and the hills displaced, my devotion will not be removed from you, nor will my covenant of friendship be displaced,” says the Lord, the one who has compassion on you.
ISA 54:11 “O afflicted one, driven away, and unconsoled! Look, I am about to set your stones in antimony and I lay your foundation with lapis-lazuli.
ISA 54:12 I will make your pinnacles out of gems, your gates out of beryl, and your outer wall out of beautiful stones.
ISA 54:13 All your children will be followers of the Lord, and your children will enjoy great prosperity.
ISA 54:14 You will be reestablished when I vindicate you. You will not experience oppression; indeed, you will not be afraid. You will not be terrified, for nothing frightening will come near you.
ISA 54:15 If anyone dares to challenge you, it will not be my doing! Whoever tries to challenge you will be defeated.
ISA 54:16 Look, I create the craftsman, who fans the coals into a fire and forges a weapon. I create the destroyer so he might devastate.
ISA 54:17 No weapon forged to be used against you will succeed; you will refute everyone who tries to accuse you. This is what the Lord will do for his servants – I will vindicate them,” says the Lord.
ISA 55:1 “Hey, all who are thirsty, come to the water! You who have no money, come! Buy and eat! Come! Buy wine and milk without money and without cost!
ISA 55:2 Why pay money for something that will not nourish you? Why spend your hard-earned money on something that will not satisfy? Listen carefully to me and eat what is nourishing! Enjoy fine food!
ISA 55:3 Pay attention and come to me! Listen, so you can live! Then I will make an unconditional covenantal promise to you, just like the reliable covenantal promises I made to David.
ISA 55:4 Look, I made him a witness to nations, a ruler and commander of nations.”
ISA 55:5 Look, you will summon nations you did not previously know; nations that did not previously know you will run to you, because of the Lord your God, the Holy One of Israel, for he bestows honor on you.
ISA 55:6 Seek the Lord while he makes himself available; call to him while he is nearby!
ISA 55:7 The wicked need to abandon their lifestyle and sinful people their plans. They should return to the Lord, and he will show mercy to them, and to their God, for he will freely forgive them.
ISA 55:8 “Indeed, my plans are not like your plans, and my deeds are not like your deeds,
ISA 55:9 for just as the sky is higher than the earth, so my deeds are superior to your deeds and my plans superior to your plans.
ISA 55:10 The rain and snow fall from the sky and do not return, but instead water the earth and make it produce and yield crops, and provide seed for the planter and food for those who must eat.
ISA 55:11 In the same way, the promise that I make does not return to me, having accomplished nothing. No, it is realized as I desire and is fulfilled as I intend.”
ISA 55:12 Indeed you will go out with joy; you will be led along in peace; the mountains and hills will give a joyful shout before you, and all the trees in the field will clap their hands.
ISA 55:13 Evergreens will grow in place of thorn bushes, firs will grow in place of nettles; they will be a monument to the Lord, a permanent reminder that will remain.
ISA 56:1 This is what the Lord says, “Promote justice! Do what is right! For I am ready to deliver you; I am ready to vindicate you openly.
ISA 56:2 The people who do this will be blessed, the people who commit themselves to obedience, who observe the Sabbath and do not defile it, who refrain from doing anything that is wrong.
ISA 56:3 No foreigner who becomes a follower of the Lord should say, ‘The Lord will certainly exclude me from his people.’ The eunuch should not say, ‘Look, I am like a dried-up tree.’”
ISA 56:4 For this is what the Lord says: “For the eunuchs who observe my Sabbaths and choose what pleases me and are faithful to my covenant,
ISA 56:5 I will set up within my temple and my walls a monument that will be better than sons and daughters. I will set up a permanent monument for them that will remain.
ISA 56:6 As for foreigners who become followers of the Lord and serve him, who love the name of the Lord and want to be his servants – all who observe the Sabbath and do not defile it, and who are faithful to my covenant –
ISA 56:7 I will bring them to my holy mountain; I will make them happy in the temple where people pray to me. Their burnt offerings and sacrifices will be accepted on my altar, for my temple will be known as a temple where all nations may pray.”
ISA 56:8 The sovereign Lord says this, the one who gathers the dispersed of Israel: “I will still gather them up.”
ISA 56:9 All you wild animals in the fields, come and devour, all you wild animals in the forest!
ISA 56:10 All their watchmen are blind, they are unaware. All of them are like mute dogs, unable to bark. They pant, lie down, and love to snooze.
ISA 56:11 The dogs have big appetites; they are never full. They are shepherds who have no understanding; they all go their own way, each one looking for monetary gain.
ISA 56:12 Each one says, ‘Come on, I’ll get some wine! Let’s guzzle some beer! Tomorrow will be just like today! We’ll have everything we want!’
ISA 57:1 The godly perish, but no one cares. Honest people disappear, when no one minds that the godly disappear because of evil.
ISA 57:2 Those who live uprightly enter a place of peace; they rest on their beds.
ISA 57:3 But approach, you sons of omen readers, you offspring of adulteresses and prostitutes!
ISA 57:4 At whom are you laughing? At whom are you opening your mouth and sticking out your tongue? You are the children of rebels, the offspring of liars,
ISA 57:5 you who practice ritual sex under the oaks and every green tree, who slaughter children near the streams under the rocky overhangs.
ISA 57:6 Among the smooth stones of the stream are the idols you love; they, they are the object of your devotion. You pour out liquid offerings to them, you make an offering. Because of these things I will seek vengeance.
ISA 57:7 On every high, elevated hill you prepare your bed; you go up there to offer sacrifices.
ISA 57:8 Behind the door and doorpost you put your symbols. Indeed, you depart from me and go up and invite them into bed with you. You purchase favors from them, you love their bed, and gaze longingly on their genitals.
ISA 57:9 You take olive oil as tribute to your king, along with many perfumes. You send your messengers to a distant place; you go all the way to Sheol.
ISA 57:10 Because of the long distance you must travel, you get tired, but you do not say, ‘I give up.’ You get renewed energy, so you don’t collapse.
ISA 57:11 Whom are you worried about? Whom do you fear, that you would act so deceitfully and not remember me or think about me? Because I have been silent for so long, you are not afraid of me.
ISA 57:12 I will denounce your so-called righteousness and your deeds, but they will not help you.
ISA 57:13 When you cry out for help, let your idols help you! The wind blows them all away, a breeze carries them away. But the one who looks to me for help will inherit the land and will have access to my holy mountain.”
ISA 57:14 He says, “Build it! Build it! Clear a way! Remove all the obstacles out of the way of my people!”
ISA 57:15 For this is what the high and exalted one says, the one who rules forever, whose name is holy: “I dwell in an exalted and holy place, but also with the discouraged and humiliated, in order to cheer up the humiliated and to encourage the discouraged.
ISA 57:16 For I will not be hostile forever or perpetually angry, for then man’s spirit would grow faint before me, the life-giving breath I created.
ISA 57:17 I was angry because of their sinful greed; I attacked them and angrily rejected them, yet they remained disobedient and stubborn.
ISA 57:18 I have seen their behavior, but I will heal them and give them rest, and I will once again console those who mourn.
ISA 57:19 I am the one who gives them reason to celebrate. Complete prosperity is available both to those who are far away and those who are nearby,” says the Lord, “and I will heal them.
ISA 57:20 But the wicked are like a surging sea that is unable to be quiet; its waves toss up mud and sand.
ISA 57:21 There will be no prosperity,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
ISA 58:1 “Shout loudly! Don’t be quiet! Yell as loud as a trumpet! Confront my people with their rebellious deeds; confront Jacob’s family with their sin!
ISA 58:2 They seek me day after day; they want to know my requirements, like a nation that does what is right and does not reject the law of their God. They ask me for just decrees; they want to be near God.
ISA 58:3 They lament, ‘Why don’t you notice when we fast? Why don’t you pay attention when we humble ourselves?’ Look, at the same time you fast, you satisfy your selfish desires, you oppress your workers.
ISA 58:4 Look, your fasting is accompanied by arguments, brawls, and fistfights. Do not fast as you do today, trying to make your voice heard in heaven.
ISA 58:5 Is this really the kind of fasting I want? Do I want a day when people merely humble themselves, bowing their heads like a reed and stretching out on sackcloth and ashes? Is this really what you call a fast, a day that is pleasing to the Lord?
ISA 58:6 No, this is the kind of fast I want. I want you to remove the sinful chains, to tear away the ropes of the burdensome yoke, to set free the oppressed, and to break every burdensome yoke.
ISA 58:7 I want you to share your food with the hungry and to provide shelter for homeless, oppressed people. When you see someone naked, clothe him! Don’t turn your back on your own flesh and blood!
ISA 58:8 Then your light will shine like the sunrise; your restoration will quickly arrive; your godly behavior will go before you, and the Lord’s splendor will be your rear guard.
ISA 58:9 Then you will call out, and the Lord will respond; you will cry out, and he will reply, ‘Here I am.’ You must remove the burdensome yoke from among you and stop pointing fingers and speaking sinfully.
ISA 58:10 You must actively help the hungry and feed the oppressed. Then your light will dispel the darkness, and your darkness will be transformed into noonday.
ISA 58:11 The Lord will continually lead you; he will feed you even in parched regions. He will give you renewed strength, and you will be like a well-watered garden, like a spring that continually produces water.
ISA 58:12 Your perpetual ruins will be rebuilt; you will reestablish the ancient foundations. You will be called, ‘The one who repairs broken walls, the one who makes the streets inhabitable again.’
ISA 58:13 You must observe the Sabbath rather than doing anything you please on my holy day. You must look forward to the Sabbath and treat the Lord’s holy day with respect. You must treat it with respect by refraining from your normal activities, and by refraining from your selfish pursuits and from making business deals.
ISA 58:14 Then you will find joy in your relationship to the Lord, and I will give you great prosperity, and cause crops to grow on the land I gave to your ancestor Jacob.” Know for certain that the Lord has spoken.
ISA 59:1 Look, the Lord’s hand is not too weak to deliver you; his ear is not too deaf to hear you.
ISA 59:2 But your sinful acts have alienated you from your God; your sins have caused him to reject you and not listen to your prayers.
ISA 59:3 For your hands are stained with blood and your fingers with sin; your lips speak lies, your tongue utters malicious words.
ISA 59:4 No one is concerned about justice; no one sets forth his case truthfully. They depend on false words and tell lies; they conceive of oppression and give birth to sin.
ISA 59:5 They hatch the eggs of a poisonous snake and spin a spider’s web. Whoever eats their eggs will die, a poisonous snake is hatched.
ISA 59:6 Their webs cannot be used for clothing; they cannot cover themselves with what they make. Their deeds are sinful; they commit violent crimes.
ISA 59:7 They are eager to do evil, quick to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are sinful; they crush and destroy.
ISA 59:8 They are unfamiliar with peace; their deeds are unjust. They use deceitful methods, and whoever deals with them is unfamiliar with peace.
ISA 59:9 For this reason deliverance is far from us and salvation does not reach us. We wait for light, but see only darkness; we wait for a bright light, but live in deep darkness.
ISA 59:10 We grope along the wall like the blind, we grope like those who cannot see; we stumble at noontime as if it were evening. Though others are strong, we are like dead men.
ISA 59:11 We all growl like bears, we coo mournfully like doves; we wait for deliverance, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far from us.
ISA 59:12 For you are aware of our many rebellious deeds, and our sins testify against us; indeed, we are aware of our rebellious deeds; we know our sins all too well.
ISA 59:13 We have rebelled and tried to deceive the Lord; we turned back from following our God. We stir up oppression and rebellion; we tell lies we concocted in our minds.
ISA 59:14 Justice is driven back; godliness stands far off. Indeed, honesty stumbles in the city square and morality is not even able to enter.
ISA 59:15 Honesty has disappeared; the one who tries to avoid evil is robbed. The Lord watches and is displeased, for there is no justice.
ISA 59:16 He sees there is no advocate; he is shocked that no one intervenes. So he takes matters into his own hands; his desire for justice drives him on.
ISA 59:17 He wears his desire for justice like body armor, and his desire to deliver is like a helmet on his head. He puts on the garments of vengeance and wears zeal like a robe.
ISA 59:18 He repays them for what they have done, dispensing angry judgment to his adversaries and punishing his enemies. He repays the coastlands.
ISA 59:19 In the west, people respect the Lord’s reputation; in the east they recognize his splendor. For he comes like a rushing stream driven on by wind sent from the Lord.
ISA 59:20 “A protector comes to Zion, to those in Jacob who repent of their rebellious deeds,” says the Lord.
ISA 59:21 “As for me, this is my promise to them,” says the Lord. “My spirit, who is upon you, and my words, which I have placed in your mouth, will not depart from your mouth or from the mouths of your children and descendants from this time forward,” says the Lord.
ISA 60:1 “Arise! Shine! For your light arrives! The splendor of the Lord shines on you!
ISA 60:2 For, look, darkness covers the earth and deep darkness covers the nations, but the Lord shines on you; his splendor appears over you.
ISA 60:3 Nations come to your light, kings to your bright light.
ISA 60:4 Look all around you! They all gather and come to you – your sons come from far away and your daughters are escorted by guardians.
ISA 60:5 Then you will look and smile, you will be excited and your heart will swell with pride. For the riches of distant lands will belong to you and the wealth of nations will come to you.
ISA 60:6 Camel caravans will cover your roads, young camels from Midian and Ephah. All the merchants of Sheba will come, bringing gold and incense and singing praises to the Lord.
ISA 60:7 All the sheep of Kedar will be gathered to you; the rams of Nebaioth will be available to you as sacrifices. They will go up on my altar acceptably, and I will bestow honor on my majestic temple.
ISA 60:8 Who are these who float along like a cloud, who fly like doves to their shelters?
ISA 60:9 Indeed, the coastlands look eagerly for me, the large ships are in the lead, bringing your sons from far away, along with their silver and gold, to honor the Lord your God, the Holy One of Israel, for he has bestowed honor on you.
ISA 60:10 Foreigners will rebuild your walls; their kings will serve you. Even though I struck you down in my anger, I will restore my favor and have compassion on you.
ISA 60:11 Your gates will remain open at all times; they will not be shut during the day or at night, so that the wealth of nations may be delivered, with their kings leading the way.
ISA 60:12 Indeed, nations or kingdoms that do not serve you will perish; such nations will be totally destroyed.
ISA 60:13 The splendor of Lebanon will come to you, its evergreens, firs, and cypresses together, to beautify my palace; I will bestow honor on my throne room.
ISA 60:14 The children of your oppressors will come bowing to you; all who treated you with disrespect will bow down at your feet. They will call you, ‘The City of the Lord, Zion of the Holy One of Israel.’
ISA 60:15 You were once abandoned and despised, with no one passing through, but I will make you a permanent source of pride and joy to coming generations.
ISA 60:16 You will drink the milk of nations; you will nurse at the breasts of kings. Then you will recognize that I, the Lord, am your deliverer, your protector, the powerful ruler of Jacob.
ISA 60:17 Instead of bronze, I will bring you gold, instead of iron, I will bring you silver, instead of wood, I will bring you bronze, instead of stones, I will bring you iron. I will make prosperity your overseer, and vindication your sovereign ruler.
ISA 60:18 Sounds of violence will no longer be heard in your land, or the sounds of destruction and devastation within your borders. You will name your walls, ‘Deliverance,’ and your gates, ‘Praise.’
ISA 60:19 The sun will no longer supply light for you by day, nor will the moon’s brightness shine on you; the Lord will be your permanent source of light – the splendor of your God will shine upon you.
ISA 60:20 Your sun will no longer set; your moon will not disappear; the Lord will be your permanent source of light; your time of sorrow will be over.
ISA 60:21 All of your people will be godly; they will possess the land permanently. I will plant them like a shoot; they will be the product of my labor, through whom I reveal my splendor.
ISA 60:22 The least of you will multiply into a thousand; the smallest of you will become a large nation. When the right time comes, I the Lord will quickly do this!”
ISA 61:1 The spirit of the sovereign Lord is upon me, because the Lord has chosen me. He has commissioned me to encourage the poor, to help the brokenhearted, to decree the release of captives, and the freeing of prisoners,
ISA 61:2 to announce the year when the Lord will show his favor, the day when our God will seek vengeance, to console all who mourn,
ISA 61:3 to strengthen those who mourn in Zion, by giving them a turban, instead of ashes, oil symbolizing joy, instead of mourning, a garment symbolizing praise, instead of discouragement. They will be called oaks of righteousness, trees planted by the Lord to reveal his splendor.
ISA 61:4 They will rebuild the perpetual ruins and restore the places that were desolate; they will reestablish the ruined cities, the places that have been desolate since ancient times.
ISA 61:5 “Foreigners will take care of your sheep; foreigners will work in your fields and vineyards.
ISA 61:6 You will be called, ‘the Lord’s priests, servants of our God.’ You will enjoy the wealth of nations and boast about the riches you receive from them.
ISA 61:7 Instead of shame, you will get a double portion; instead of humiliation, they will rejoice over the land they receive. Yes, they will possess a double portion in their land and experience lasting joy.
ISA 61:8 For I, the Lord, love justice and hate robbery and sin. I will repay them because of my faithfulness; I will make a permanent covenant with them.
ISA 61:9 Their descendants will be known among the nations, their offspring among the peoples. All who see them will recognize that the Lord has blessed them.”
ISA 61:10 I will greatly rejoice in the Lord; I will be overjoyed because of my God. For he clothes me in garments of deliverance; he puts on me a robe symbolizing vindication. I look like a bridegroom when he wears a turban as a priest would; I look like a bride when she puts on her jewelry.
ISA 61:11 For just as the ground produces its crops and a garden yields its produce, so the sovereign Lord will cause deliverance to grow, and give his people reason to praise him in the sight of all the nations.
ISA 62:1 “For the sake of Zion I will not be silent; for the sake of Jerusalem I will not be quiet, until her vindication shines brightly and her deliverance burns like a torch.”
ISA 62:2 Nations will see your vindication, and all kings your splendor. You will be called by a new name that the Lord himself will give you.
ISA 62:3 You will be a majestic crown in the hand of the Lord, a royal turban in the hand of your God.
ISA 62:4 You will no longer be called, “Abandoned,” and your land will no longer be called “Desolate.” Indeed, you will be called “My Delight is in Her,” and your land “Married.” For the Lord will take delight in you, and your land will be married to him.
ISA 62:5 As a young man marries a young woman, so your sons will marry you. As a bridegroom rejoices over a bride, so your God will rejoice over you.
ISA 62:6 I post watchmen on your walls, O Jerusalem; they should keep praying all day and all night. You who pray to the Lord, don’t be silent!
ISA 62:7 Don’t allow him to rest until he reestablishes Jerusalem, until he makes Jerusalem the pride of the earth.
ISA 62:8 The Lord swears an oath by his right hand, by his strong arm: “I will never again give your grain to your enemies as food, and foreigners will not drink your wine, which you worked hard to produce.
ISA 62:9 But those who harvest the grain will eat it, and will praise the Lord. Those who pick the grapes will drink the wine in the courts of my holy sanctuary.”
ISA 62:10 Come through! Come through the gates! Prepare the way for the people! Build it! Build the roadway! Remove the stones! Lift a signal flag for the nations!
ISA 62:11 Look, the Lord announces to the entire earth: “Say to Daughter Zion, ‘Look, your deliverer comes! Look, his reward is with him and his reward goes before him!’”
ISA 62:12 They will be called, “The Holy People, the Ones Protected by the Lord.” You will be called, “Sought After, City Not Abandoned.”
ISA 63:1 Who is this who comes from Edom, dressed in bright red, coming from Bozrah? Who is this one wearing royal attire, who marches confidently because of his great strength? “It is I, the one who announces vindication, and who is able to deliver!”
ISA 63:2 Why are your clothes red? Why do you look like someone who has stomped on grapes in a vat?
ISA 63:3 “I have stomped grapes in the winepress all by myself; no one from the nations joined me. I stomped on them in my anger; I trampled them down in my rage. Their juice splashed on my garments, and stained all my clothes.
ISA 63:4 For I looked forward to the day of vengeance, and then payback time arrived.
ISA 63:5 I looked, but there was no one to help; I was shocked because there was no one offering support. So my right arm accomplished deliverance; my raging anger drove me on.
ISA 63:6 I trampled nations in my anger, I made them drunk in my rage, I splashed their blood on the ground.”
ISA 63:7 I will tell of the faithful acts of the Lord, of the Lord’s praiseworthy deeds. I will tell about all the Lord did for us, the many good things he did for the family of Israel, because of his compassion and great faithfulness.
ISA 63:8 He said, “Certainly they will be my people, children who are not disloyal.” He became their deliverer.
ISA 63:9 Through all that they suffered, he suffered too. The messenger sent from his very presence delivered them. In his love and mercy he protected them; he lifted them up and carried them throughout ancient times.
ISA 63:10 But they rebelled and offended his holy Spirit, so he turned into an enemy and fought against them.
ISA 63:11 His people remembered the ancient times. Where is the one who brought them up out of the sea, along with the shepherd of his flock? Where is the one who placed his holy Spirit among them,
ISA 63:12 the one who made his majestic power available to Moses, who divided the water before them, gaining for himself a lasting reputation,
ISA 63:13 who led them through the deep water? Like a horse running on flat land they did not stumble.
ISA 63:14 Like an animal that goes down into a valley to graze, so the Spirit of the Lord granted them rest. In this way you guided your people, gaining for yourself an honored reputation.
ISA 63:15 Look down from heaven and take notice, from your holy, majestic palace! Where are your zeal and power? Do not hold back your tender compassion!
ISA 63:16 For you are our father, though Abraham does not know us and Israel does not recognize us. You, Lord, are our father; you have been called our protector from ancient times.
ISA 63:17 Why, Lord, do you make us stray from your ways, and make our minds stubborn so that we do not obey you? Return for the sake of your servants, the tribes of your inheritance!
ISA 63:18 For a short time your special nation possessed a land, but then our adversaries knocked down your holy sanctuary.
ISA 63:19 We existed from ancient times, but you did not rule over them, they were not your subjects.
ISA 64:1 If only you would tear apart the sky and come down! The mountains would tremble before you!
ISA 64:2 As when fire ignites dry wood, or fire makes water boil, let your adversaries know who you are, and may the nations shake at your presence!
ISA 64:3 When you performed awesome deeds that took us by surprise, you came down, and the mountains trembled before you.
ISA 64:4 Since ancient times no one has heard or perceived, no eye has seen any God besides you, who intervenes for those who wait for him.
ISA 64:5 You assist those who delight in doing what is right, who observe your commandments. Look, you were angry because we violated them continually. How then can we be saved?
ISA 64:6 We are all like one who is unclean, all our so-called righteous acts are like a menstrual rag in your sight. We all wither like a leaf; our sins carry us away like the wind.
ISA 64:7 No one invokes your name, or makes an effort to take hold of you. For you have rejected us and handed us over to our own sins.
ISA 64:8 Yet, Lord, you are our father. We are the clay, and you are our potter; we are all the product of your labor.
ISA 64:9 Lord, do not be too angry! Do not hold our sins against us continually! Take a good look at your people, at all of us!
ISA 64:10 Your chosen cities have become a desert; Zion has become a desert, Jerusalem is a desolate ruin.
ISA 64:11 Our holy temple, our pride and joy, the place where our ancestors praised you, has been burned with fire; all our prized possessions have been destroyed.
ISA 64:12 In light of all this, how can you still hold back, Lord? How can you be silent and continue to humiliate us?
ISA 65:1 “I made myself available to those who did not ask for me; I appeared to those who did not look for me. I said, ‘Here I am! Here I am!’ to a nation that did not invoke my name.
ISA 65:2 I spread out my hands all day long to my rebellious people, who lived in a way that is morally unacceptable, and who did what they desired.
ISA 65:3 These people continually and blatantly offend me as they sacrifice in their sacred orchards and burn incense on brick altars.
ISA 65:4 They sit among the tombs and keep watch all night long. They eat pork, and broth from unclean sacrificial meat is in their pans.
ISA 65:5 They say, ‘Keep to yourself! Don’t get near me, for I am holier than you!’ These people are like smoke in my nostrils, like a fire that keeps burning all day long.
ISA 65:6 Look, I have decreed: I will not keep silent, but will pay them back; I will pay them back exactly what they deserve,
ISA 65:7 for your sins and your ancestors’ sins,” says the Lord. “Because they burned incense on the mountains and offended me on the hills, I will punish them in full measure.”
ISA 65:8 This is what the Lord says: “When juice is discovered in a cluster of grapes, someone says, ‘Don’t destroy it, for it contains juice.’ So I will do for the sake of my servants – I will not destroy everyone.
ISA 65:9 I will bring forth descendants from Jacob, and from Judah people to take possession of my mountains. My chosen ones will take possession of the land; my servants will live there.
ISA 65:10 Sharon will become a pasture for sheep, and the Valley of Achor a place where cattle graze; they will belong to my people, who seek me.
ISA 65:11 But as for you who abandon the Lord and forget about worshiping at my holy mountain, who prepare a feast for the god called ‘Fortune,’ and fill up wine jugs for the god called ‘Destiny’ –
ISA 65:12 I predestine you to die by the sword, all of you will kneel down at the slaughtering block, because I called to you, and you did not respond, I spoke and you did not listen. You did evil before me; you chose to do what displeases me.”
ISA 65:13 So this is what the sovereign Lord says: “Look, my servants will eat, but you will be hungry! Look, my servants will drink, but you will be thirsty! Look, my servants will rejoice, but you will be humiliated!
ISA 65:14 Look, my servants will shout for joy as happiness fills their hearts! But you will cry out as sorrow fills your hearts; you will wail because your spirits will be crushed.
ISA 65:15 Your names will live on in the curse formulas of my chosen ones. The sovereign Lord will kill you, but he will give his servants another name.
ISA 65:16 Whoever pronounces a blessing in the earth will do so in the name of the faithful God; whoever makes an oath in the earth will do so in the name of the faithful God. For past problems will be forgotten; I will no longer think about them.
ISA 65:17 For look, I am ready to create new heavens and a new earth! The former ones will not be remembered; no one will think about them anymore.
ISA 65:18 But be happy and rejoice forevermore over what I am about to create! For look, I am ready to create Jerusalem to be a source of joy, and her people to be a source of happiness.
ISA 65:19 Jerusalem will bring me joy, and my people will bring me happiness. The sound of weeping or cries of sorrow will never be heard in her again.
ISA 65:20 Never again will one of her infants live just a few days or an old man die before his time. Indeed, no one will die before the age of a hundred, anyone who fails to reach the age of a hundred will be considered cursed.
ISA 65:21 They will build houses and live in them; they will plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
ISA 65:22 No longer will they build a house only to have another live in it, or plant a vineyard only to have another eat its fruit, for my people will live as long as trees, and my chosen ones will enjoy to the fullest what they have produced.
ISA 65:23 They will not work in vain, or give birth to children that will experience disaster. For the Lord will bless their children and their descendants.
ISA 65:24 Before they even call out, I will respond; while they are still speaking, I will hear.
ISA 65:25 A wolf and a lamb will graze together; a lion, like an ox, will eat straw, and a snake’s food will be dirt. They will no longer injure or destroy on my entire royal mountain,” says the Lord.
ISA 66:1 This is what the Lord says: “The heavens are my throne and the earth is my footstool. Where then is the house you will build for me? Where is the place where I will rest?
ISA 66:2 My hand made them; that is how they came to be,” says the Lord. I show special favor to the humble and contrite, who respect what I have to say.
ISA 66:3 The one who slaughters a bull also strikes down a man; the one who sacrifices a lamb also breaks a dog’s neck; the one who presents an offering includes pig’s blood with it; the one who offers incense also praises an idol. They have decided to behave this way; they enjoy these disgusting practices.
ISA 66:4 So I will choose severe punishment for them; I will bring on them what they dread, because I called, and no one responded, I spoke and they did not listen. They did evil before me; they chose to do what displeases me.”
ISA 66:5 Hear the word of the Lord, you who respect what he has to say! Your countrymen, who hate you and exclude you, supposedly for the sake of my name, say, “May the Lord be glorified, then we will witness your joy.” But they will be put to shame.
ISA 66:6 The sound of battle comes from the city; the sound comes from the temple! It is the sound of the Lord paying back his enemies.
ISA 66:7 Before she goes into labor, she gives birth! Before her contractions begin, she delivers a boy!
ISA 66:8 Who has ever heard of such a thing? Who has ever seen this? Can a country be brought forth in one day? Can a nation be born in a single moment? Yet as soon as Zion goes into labor she gives birth to sons!
ISA 66:9 “Do I bring a baby to the birth opening and then not deliver it?” asks the Lord. “Or do I bring a baby to the point of delivery and then hold it back?” asks your God.
ISA 66:10 Be happy for Jerusalem and rejoice with her, all you who love her! Share in her great joy, all you who have mourned over her!
ISA 66:11 For you will nurse from her satisfying breasts and be nourished; you will feed with joy from her milk-filled breasts.
ISA 66:12 For this is what the Lord says: “Look, I am ready to extend to her prosperity that will flow like a river, the riches of nations will flow into her like a stream that floods its banks. You will nurse from her breast and be carried at her side; you will play on her knees.
ISA 66:13 As a mother consoles a child, so I will console you, and you will be consoled over Jerusalem.”
ISA 66:14 When you see this, you will be happy, and you will be revived. The Lord will reveal his power to his servants and his anger to his enemies.
ISA 66:15 For look, the Lord comes with fire, his chariots come like a windstorm, to reveal his raging anger, his battle cry, and his flaming arrows.
ISA 66:16 For the Lord judges all humanity with fire and his sword; the Lord will kill many.
ISA 66:17 “As for those who consecrate and ritually purify themselves so they can follow their leader and worship in the sacred orchards, those who eat the flesh of pigs and other disgusting creatures, like mice – they will all be destroyed together,” says the Lord.
ISA 66:18 “I hate their deeds and thoughts! So I am coming to gather all the nations and ethnic groups; they will come and witness my splendor.
ISA 66:19 I will perform a mighty act among them and then send some of those who remain to the nations – to Tarshish, Pul, Lud (known for its archers ), Tubal, Javan, and to the distant coastlands that have not heard about me or seen my splendor. They will tell the nations of my splendor.
ISA 66:20 They will bring back all your countrymen from all the nations as an offering to the Lord. They will bring them on horses, in chariots, in wagons, on mules, and on camels to my holy hill Jerusalem,” says the Lord, “just as the Israelites bring offerings to the Lord’s temple in ritually pure containers.
ISA 66:21 And I will choose some of them as priests and Levites,” says the Lord.
ISA 66:22 “For just as the new heavens and the new earth I am about to make will remain standing before me,” says the Lord, “so your descendants and your name will remain.
ISA 66:23 From one month to the next and from one Sabbath to the next, all people will come to worship me,” says the Lord.
ISA 66:24 “They will go out and observe the corpses of those who rebelled against me, for the maggots that eat them will not die, and the fire that consumes them will not die out. All people will find the sight abhorrent.”
JER 1:1 The following is a record of what Jeremiah son of Hilkiah prophesied. He was one of the priests who lived at Anathoth in the territory of the tribe of Benjamin.
JER 1:2 The Lord began to speak to him in the thirteenth year that Josiah son of Amon ruled over Judah.
JER 1:3 The Lord also spoke to him when Jehoiakim son of Josiah ruled over Judah, and he continued to speak to him until the fifth month of the eleventh year that Zedekiah son of Josiah ruled over Judah. That was when the people of Jerusalem were taken into exile.
JER 1:4 The Lord said to me,
JER 1:5 “Before I formed you in your mother’s womb I chose you. Before you were born I set you apart. I appointed you to be a prophet to the nations.”
JER 1:6 I answered, “Oh, Lord God, I really do not know how to speak well enough for that, for I am too young.”
JER 1:7 The Lord said to me, “Do not say, ‘I am too young.’ But go to whomever I send you and say whatever I tell you.
JER 1:8 Do not be afraid of those to whom I send you, for I will be with you to protect you,” says the Lord.
JER 1:9 Then the Lord reached out his hand and touched my mouth and said to me, “I will most assuredly give you the words you are to speak for me.
JER 1:10 Know for certain that I hereby give you the authority to announce to nations and kingdoms that they will be uprooted and torn down, destroyed and demolished, rebuilt and firmly planted.”
JER 1:11 Later the Lord asked me, “What do you see, Jeremiah?” I answered, “I see a branch of an almond tree.”
JER 1:12 Then the Lord said, “You have observed correctly. This means I am watching to make sure my threats are carried out.”
JER 1:13 The Lord again asked me, “What do you see?” I answered, “I see a pot of boiling water; it is tipped toward us from the north.”
JER 1:14 Then the Lord said, “This means destruction will break out from the north on all who live in the land.
JER 1:15 For I will soon summon all the peoples of the kingdoms of the north,” says the Lord. “They will come and their kings will set up their thrones near the entrances of the gates of Jerusalem. They will attack all the walls surrounding it, and all the towns in Judah.
JER 1:16 In this way I will pass sentence on the people of Jerusalem and Judah because of all their wickedness. For they rejected me and offered sacrifices to other gods, worshiping what they made with their own hands.”
JER 1:17 “But you, Jeremiah, get yourself ready! Go and tell these people everything I instruct you to say. Do not be terrified of them, or I will give you good reason to be terrified of them.
JER 1:18 I, the Lord, hereby promise to make you as strong as a fortified city, an iron pillar, and a bronze wall. You will be able to stand up against all who live in the land, including the kings of Judah, its officials, its priests and all the people of the land.
JER 1:19 They will attack you but they will not be able to overcome you, for I will be with you to rescue you,” says the Lord.
JER 2:1 The Lord spoke to me. He said:
JER 2:2 “Go and declare in the hearing of the people of Jerusalem: ‘This is what the Lord says: “I have fond memories of you, how devoted you were to me in your early years. I remember how you loved me like a new bride; you followed me through the wilderness, through a land that had never been planted.
JER 2:3 Israel was set apart to the Lord; they were like the first fruits of a harvest to him. All who tried to devour them were punished; disaster came upon them,” says the Lord.’”
JER 2:4 Now listen to what the Lord has to say, you descendants of Jacob, all you family groups from the nation of Israel.
JER 2:5 This is what the Lord says: “What fault could your ancestors have possibly found in me that they strayed so far from me? They paid allegiance to worthless idols, and so became worthless to me.
JER 2:6 They did not ask: ‘Where is the Lord who delivered us out of Egypt, who brought us through the wilderness, through a land of desert sands and rift valleys, through a land of drought and deep darkness, through a land in which no one travels, and where no one lives?’
JER 2:7 I brought you into a fertile land so you could enjoy its fruits and its rich bounty. But when you entered my land, you defiled it; you made the land I call my own loathsome to me.
JER 2:8 Your priests did not ask, ‘Where is the Lord?’ Those responsible for teaching my law did not really know me. Your rulers rebelled against me. Your prophets prophesied in the name of the god Baal. They all worshiped idols that could not help them.
JER 2:9 “So, once more I will state my case against you,” says the Lord. “I will also state it against your children and grandchildren.
JER 2:10 Go west across the sea to the coasts of Cyprus and see. Send someone east to Kedar and have them look carefully. See if such a thing as this has ever happened:
JER 2:11 Has a nation ever changed its gods (even though they are not really gods at all)? But my people have exchanged me, their glorious God, for a god that cannot help them at all!
JER 2:12 Be amazed at this, O heavens! Be shocked and utterly dumbfounded,” says the Lord.
JER 2:13 “Do so because my people have committed a double wrong: they have rejected me, the fountain of life-giving water, and they have dug cisterns for themselves, cracked cisterns which cannot even hold water.”
JER 2:14 “Israel is not a slave, is he? He was not born into slavery, was he? If not, why then is he being carried off?
JER 2:15 Like lions his enemies roar victoriously over him; they raise their voices in triumph. They have laid his land waste; his cities have been burned down and deserted.
JER 2:16 Even the soldiers from Memphis and Tahpanhes have cracked your skulls, people of Israel.
JER 2:17 You have brought all this on yourself, Israel, by deserting the Lord your God when he was leading you along the right path.
JER 2:18 What good will it do you then to go down to Egypt to seek help from the Egyptians? What good will it do you to go over to Assyria to seek help from the Assyrians?
JER 2:19 Your own wickedness will bring about your punishment. Your unfaithful acts will bring down discipline on you. Know, then, and realize how utterly harmful it was for you to reject me, the Lord your God, to show no respect for me,” says the Lord God who rules over all.
JER 2:20 “Indeed, long ago you threw off my authority and refused to be subject to me. You said, ‘I will not serve you.’ Instead, you gave yourself to other gods on every high hill and under every green tree, like a prostitute sprawls out before her lovers.
JER 2:21 I planted you in the land like a special vine of the very best stock. Why in the world have you turned into something like a wild vine that produces rotten, foul-smelling grapes?
JER 2:22 You can try to wash away your guilt with a strong detergent. You can use as much soap as you want. But the stain of your guilt is still there for me to see,” says the Lord God.
JER 2:23 “How can you say, ‘I have not made myself unclean. I have not paid allegiance to the gods called Baal.’ Just look at the way you have behaved in the Valley of Hinnom! Think about the things you have done there! You are like a flighty, young female camel that rushes here and there, crisscrossing its path.
JER 2:24 You are like a wild female donkey brought up in the wilderness. In her lust she sniffs the wind to get the scent of a male. No one can hold her back when she is in heat. None of the males need wear themselves out chasing after her. At mating time she is easy to find.
JER 2:25 Do not chase after other gods until your shoes wear out and your throats become dry. But you say, ‘It is useless for you to try and stop me because I love those foreign gods and want to pursue them!’
JER 2:26 Just as a thief has to suffer dishonor when he is caught, so the people of Israel will suffer dishonor for what they have done. So will their kings and officials, their priests and their prophets.
JER 2:27 They say to a wooden idol, ‘You are my father.’ They say to a stone image, ‘You gave birth to me.’ Yes, they have turned away from me instead of turning to me. Yet when they are in trouble, they say, ‘Come and save us!’
JER 2:28 But where are the gods you made for yourselves? Let them save you when you are in trouble. The sad fact is that you have as many gods as you have towns, Judah.
JER 2:29 “Why do you try to refute me? All of you have rebelled against me,” says the Lord.
JER 2:30 “It did no good for me to punish your people. They did not respond to such correction. You slaughtered your prophets like a voracious lion.”
JER 2:31 You people of this generation, listen to what the Lord says. “Have I been like a wilderness to you, Israel? Have I been like a dark and dangerous land to you? Why then do you say, ‘We are free to wander. We will not come to you any more?’
JER 2:32 Does a young woman forget to put on her jewels? Does a bride forget to put on her bridal attire? But my people have forgotten me for more days than can even be counted.
JER 2:33 “My, how good you have become at chasing after your lovers! Why, you could even teach prostitutes a thing or two!
JER 2:34 Even your clothes are stained with the lifeblood of the poor who had not done anything wrong; you did not catch them breaking into your homes. Yet, in spite of all these things you have done,
JER 2:35 you say, ‘I have not done anything wrong, so the Lord cannot really be angry with me any more.’ But, watch out! I will bring down judgment on you because you say, ‘I have not committed any sin.’
JER 2:36 Why do you constantly go about changing your political allegiances? You will get no help from Egypt just as you got no help from Assyria.
JER 2:37 Moreover, you will come away from Egypt with your hands covering your faces in sorrow and shame because the Lord will not allow your reliance on them to be successful and you will not gain any help from them.
JER 3:1 “If a man divorces his wife and she leaves him and becomes another man’s wife, he may not take her back again. Doing that would utterly defile the land. But you, Israel, have given yourself as a prostitute to many gods. So what makes you think you can return to me?” says the Lord.
JER 3:2 “Look up at the hilltops and consider this. You have had sex with other gods on every one of them. You waited for those gods like a thief lying in wait in the desert. You defiled the land by your wicked prostitution to other gods.
JER 3:3 That is why the rains have been withheld, and the spring rains have not come. Yet in spite of this you are obstinate as a prostitute. You refuse to be ashamed of what you have done.
JER 3:4 Even now you say to me, ‘You are my father! You have been my faithful companion ever since I was young.
JER 3:5 You will not always be angry with me, will you? You will not be mad at me forever, will you?’ That is what you say, but you continually do all the evil that you can.”
JER 3:6 When Josiah was king of Judah, the Lord said to me, “Jeremiah, you have no doubt seen what wayward Israel has done. You have seen how she went up to every high hill and under every green tree to give herself like a prostitute to other gods.
JER 3:7 Yet even after she had done all that, I thought that she might come back to me. But she did not. Her sister, unfaithful Judah, saw what she did.
JER 3:8 She also saw that I gave wayward Israel her divorce papers and sent her away because of her adulterous worship of other gods. Even after her unfaithful sister Judah had seen this, she still was not afraid, and she too went and gave herself like a prostitute to other gods.
JER 3:9 Because she took her prostitution so lightly, she defiled the land through her adulterous worship of gods made of wood and stone.
JER 3:10 In spite of all this, Israel’s sister, unfaithful Judah, has not turned back to me with any sincerity; she has only pretended to do so,” says the Lord.
JER 3:11 Then the Lord said to me, “Under the circumstances, wayward Israel could even be considered less guilty than unfaithful Judah.
JER 3:12 “Go and shout this message to my people in the countries in the north. Tell them, ‘Come back to me, wayward Israel,’ says the Lord. ‘I will not continue to look on you with displeasure. For I am merciful,’ says the Lord. ‘I will not be angry with you forever.
JER 3:13 However, you must confess that you have done wrong, and that you have rebelled against the Lord your God. You must confess that you have given yourself to foreign gods under every green tree, and have not obeyed my commands,’ says the Lord.
JER 3:14 “Come back to me, my wayward sons,” says the Lord, “for I am your true master. If you do, I will take one of you from each town and two of you from each family group, and I will bring you back to Zion.
JER 3:15 I will give you leaders who will be faithful to me. They will lead you with knowledge and insight.
JER 3:16 In those days, your population will greatly increase in the land. At that time,” says the Lord, “people will no longer talk about having the ark that contains the Lord’s covenant with us. They will not call it to mind, remember it, or miss it. No, that will not be done any more!
JER 3:17 At that time the city of Jerusalem will be called the Lord’s throne. All nations will gather there in Jerusalem to honor the Lord’s name. They will no longer follow the stubborn inclinations of their own evil hearts.
JER 3:18 At that time the nation of Judah and the nation of Israel will be reunited. Together they will come back from a land in the north to the land that I gave to your ancestors as a permanent possession. ”
JER 3:19 “I thought to myself, ‘Oh what a joy it would be for me to treat you like a son! What a joy it would be for me to give you a pleasant land, the most beautiful piece of property there is in all the world!’ I thought you would call me, ‘Father’ and would never cease being loyal to me.
JER 3:20 But, you have been unfaithful to me, nation of Israel, like an unfaithful wife who has left her husband,” says the Lord.
JER 3:21 “A noise is heard on the hilltops. It is the sound of the people of Israel crying and pleading to their gods. Indeed they have followed sinful ways; they have forgotten to be true to the Lord their God.
JER 3:22 Come back to me, you wayward people. I want to cure your waywardness. Say, ‘Here we are. We come to you because you are the Lord our God.
JER 3:23 We know our noisy worship of false gods on the hills and mountains did not help us. We know that the Lord our God is the only one who can deliver Israel.
JER 3:24 From earliest times our worship of that shameful god, Baal, has taken away all that our ancestors worked for. It has taken away our flocks and our herds, and even our sons and daughters.
JER 3:25 Let us acknowledge our shame. Let us bear the disgrace that we deserve. For we have sinned against the Lord our God, both we and our ancestors. From earliest times to this very day we have not obeyed the Lord our God.’
JER 4:1 “If you, Israel, want to come back,” says the Lord, “if you want to come back to me you must get those disgusting idols out of my sight and must no longer go astray.
JER 4:2 You must be truthful, honest and upright when you take an oath saying, ‘As surely as the Lord lives!’ If you do, the nations will pray to be as blessed by him as you are and will make him the object of their boasting.”
JER 4:3 Yes, the Lord has this to say to the people of Judah and Jerusalem: “Like a farmer breaking up hard unplowed ground, you must break your rebellious will and make a new beginning; just as a farmer must clear away thorns lest the seed is wasted, you must get rid of the sin that is ruining your lives.
JER 4:4 Just as ritual circumcision cuts away the foreskin as an external symbol of dedicated covenant commitment, you must genuinely dedicate yourselves to the Lord and get rid of everything that hinders your commitment to me, people of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem. If you do not, my anger will blaze up like a flaming fire against you that no one will be able to extinguish. That will happen because of the evil you have done.”
JER 4:5 The Lord said, “Announce this in Judah and proclaim it in Jerusalem: ‘Sound the trumpet throughout the land!’ Shout out loudly, ‘Gather together! Let us flee into the fortified cities!’
JER 4:6 Raise a signal flag that tells people to go to Zion. Run for safety! Do not delay! For I am about to bring disaster out of the north. It will bring great destruction.
JER 4:7 Like a lion that has come up from its lair the one who destroys nations has set out from his home base. He is coming out to lay your land waste. Your cities will become ruins and lie uninhabited.
JER 4:8 So put on sackcloth! Mourn and wail, saying, ‘The fierce anger of the Lord has not turned away from us!’”
JER 4:9 “When this happens,” says the Lord, “the king and his officials will lose their courage. The priests will be struck with horror, and the prophets will be speechless in astonishment.”
JER 4:10 In response to all this I said, “Ah, Lord God, you have surely allowed the people of Judah and Jerusalem to be deceived by those who say, ‘You will be safe!’ But in fact a sword is already at our throats.”
JER 4:11 “At that time the people of Judah and Jerusalem will be told, ‘A scorching wind will sweep down from the hilltops in the desert on my dear people. It will not be a gentle breeze for winnowing the grain and blowing away the chaff.
JER 4:12 No, a wind too strong for that will come at my bidding. Yes, even now I, myself, am calling down judgment on them.’
JER 4:13 Look! The enemy is approaching like gathering clouds. The roar of his chariots is like that of a whirlwind. His horses move more swiftly than eagles.” I cry out, “We are doomed, for we will be destroyed!”
JER 4:14 “Oh people of Jerusalem, purify your hearts from evil so that you may yet be delivered. How long will you continue to harbor up wicked schemes within you?
JER 4:15 For messengers are coming, heralding disaster, from the city of Dan and from the hills of Ephraim.
JER 4:16 They are saying, ‘Announce to the surrounding nations, “The enemy is coming!” Proclaim this message to Jerusalem: “Those who besiege cities are coming from a distant land. They are ready to raise the battle cry against the towns in Judah.”’
JER 4:17 They will surround Jerusalem like men guarding a field because they have rebelled against me,” says the Lord.
JER 4:18 “The way you have lived and the things you have done will bring this on you. This is the punishment you deserve, and it will be painful indeed. The pain will be so bad it will pierce your heart.”
JER 4:19 I said, “Oh, the feeling in the pit of my stomach! I writhe in anguish. Oh, the pain in my heart! My heart pounds within me. I cannot keep silent. For I hear the sound of the trumpet; the sound of the battle cry pierces my soul!
JER 4:20 I see one destruction after another taking place, so that the whole land lies in ruins. I see our tents suddenly destroyed, their curtains torn down in a mere instant.
JER 4:21 “How long must I see the enemy’s battle flags and hear the military signals of their bugles?”
JER 4:22 The Lord answered, “This will happen because my people are foolish. They do not know me. They are like children who have no sense. They have no understanding. They are skilled at doing evil. They do not know how to do good.”
JER 4:23 “I looked at the land and saw that it was an empty wasteland. I looked up at the sky, and its light had vanished.
JER 4:24 I looked at the mountains and saw that they were shaking. All the hills were swaying back and forth!
JER 4:25 I looked and saw that there were no more people, and that all the birds in the sky had flown away.
JER 4:26 I looked and saw that the fruitful land had become a desert and that all of the cities had been laid in ruins. The Lord had brought this all about because of his blazing anger.
JER 4:27 All this will happen because the Lord said, “The whole land will be desolate; however, I will not completely destroy it.
JER 4:28 Because of this the land will mourn and the sky above will grow black. For I have made my purpose known and I will not relent or turn back from carrying it out.”
JER 4:29 At the sound of the approaching horsemen and archers the people of every town will flee. Some of them will hide in the thickets. Others will climb up among the rocks. All the cities will be deserted. No one will remain in them.
JER 4:30 And you, Zion, city doomed to destruction, you accomplish nothing by wearing a beautiful dress, decking yourself out in jewels of gold, and putting on eye shadow! You are making yourself beautiful for nothing. Your lovers spurn you. They want to kill you.
JER 4:31 In fact, I hear a cry like that of a woman in labor, a cry of anguish like that of a woman giving birth to her first baby. It is the cry of Daughter Zion gasping for breath, reaching out for help, saying, “I am done in! My life is ebbing away before these murderers!”
JER 5:1 The Lord said, “Go up and down through the streets of Jerusalem. Look around and see for yourselves. Search through its public squares. See if any of you can find a single person who deals honestly and tries to be truthful. If you can, then I will not punish this city.
JER 5:2 These people make promises in the name of the Lord. But the fact is, what they swear to is really a lie.”
JER 5:3 Lord, I know you look for faithfulness. But even when you punish these people, they feel no remorse. Even when you nearly destroy them, they refuse to be corrected. They have become as hardheaded as a rock. They refuse to change their ways.
JER 5:4 I thought, “Surely it is only the ignorant poor who act this way. They act like fools because they do not know what the Lord demands. They do not know what their God requires of them.
JER 5:5 I will go to the leaders and speak with them. Surely they know what the Lord demands. Surely they know what their God requires of them.” Yet all of them, too, have rejected his authority and refuse to submit to him.
JER 5:6 So like a lion from the thicket their enemies will kill them. Like a wolf from the desert they will destroy them. Like a leopard they will lie in wait outside their cities and totally destroy anyone who ventures out. For they have rebelled so much and done so many unfaithful things.
JER 5:7 The Lord asked, “How can I leave you unpunished, Jerusalem? Your people have rejected me and have worshiped gods that are not gods at all. Even though I supplied all their needs, they were like an unfaithful wife to me. They went flocking to the houses of prostitutes.
JER 5:8 They are like lusty, well-fed stallions. Each of them lusts after his neighbor’s wife.
JER 5:9 I will surely punish them for doing such things!” says the Lord. “I will surely bring retribution on such a nation as this!”
JER 5:10 The Lord commanded the enemy, “March through the vineyards of Israel and Judah and ruin them. But do not destroy them completely. Strip off their branches for these people do not belong to the Lord.
JER 5:11 For the nations of Israel and Judah have been very unfaithful to me,” says the Lord.
JER 5:12 “These people have denied what the Lord says. They have said, ‘That is not so! No harm will come to us. We will not experience war and famine.
JER 5:13 The prophets will prove to be full of wind. The Lord has not spoken through them. So, let what they say happen to them.’”
JER 5:14 Because of that, the Lord, the God who rules over all, said to me, “Because these people have spoken like this, I will make the words that I put in your mouth like fire. And I will make this people like wood which the fiery judgments you speak will burn up.”
JER 5:15 The Lord says, “Listen, nation of Israel! I am about to bring a nation from far away to attack you. It will be a nation that was founded long ago and has lasted for a long time. It will be a nation whose language you will not know. Its people will speak words that you will not be able to understand.
JER 5:16 All of its soldiers are strong and mighty. Their arrows will send you to your grave.
JER 5:17 They will eat up your crops and your food. They will kill off your sons and your daughters. They will eat up your sheep and your cattle. They will destroy your vines and your fig trees. Their weapons will batter down the fortified cities you trust in.
JER 5:18 Yet even then I will not completely destroy you,” says the Lord.
JER 5:19 “So then, Jeremiah, when your people ask, ‘Why has the Lord our God done all this to us?’ tell them, ‘It is because you rejected me and served foreign gods in your own land. So you must serve foreigners in a land that does not belong to you.’
JER 5:20 “Proclaim this message among the descendants of Jacob. Make it known throughout Judah.
JER 5:21 Tell them: ‘Hear this, you foolish people who have no understanding, who have eyes but do not discern, who have ears but do not perceive:
JER 5:22 “You should fear me!” says the Lord. “You should tremble in awe before me! I made the sand to be a boundary for the sea, a permanent barrier that it can never cross. Its waves may roll, but they can never prevail. They may roar, but they can never cross beyond that boundary.”
JER 5:23 But these people have stubborn and rebellious hearts. They have turned aside and gone their own way.
JER 5:24 They do not say to themselves, “Let us revere the Lord our God. It is he who gives us the autumn rains and the spring rains at the proper time. It is he who assures us of the regular weeks of harvest.”
JER 5:25 Your misdeeds have stopped these things from coming. Your sins have deprived you of my bounty.’
JER 5:26 “Indeed, there are wicked scoundrels among my people. They lie in wait like bird catchers hiding in ambush. They set deadly traps to catch people.
JER 5:27 Like a cage filled with the birds that have been caught, their houses are filled with the gains of their fraud and deceit. That is how they have gotten so rich and powerful.
JER 5:28 That is how they have grown fat and sleek. There is no limit to the evil things they do. They do not plead the cause of the fatherless in such a way as to win it. They do not defend the rights of the poor.
JER 5:29 I will certainly punish them for doing such things!” says the Lord. “I will certainly bring retribution on such a nation as this!
JER 5:30 “Something horrible and shocking is going on in the land of Judah:
JER 5:31 The prophets prophesy lies. The priests exercise power by their own authority. And my people love to have it this way. But they will not be able to help you when the time of judgment comes!
JER 6:1 “Run for safety, people of Benjamin! Get out of Jerusalem! Sound the trumpet in Tekoa! Light the signal fires at Beth Hakkerem! For disaster lurks out of the north; it will bring great destruction.
JER 6:2 I will destroy Daughter Zion, who is as delicate and defenseless as a young maiden.
JER 6:3 Kings will come against it with their armies. They will encamp in siege all around it. Each of them will devastate the portion assigned to him.
JER 6:4 They will say, ‘Prepare to do battle against it! Come on! Let’s attack it at noon!’ But later they will say, ‘Oh, oh! Too bad! The day is almost over and the shadows of evening are getting long.
JER 6:5 So come on, let’s go ahead and attack it by night and destroy all its fortified buildings.’
JER 6:6 All of this is because the Lord who rules over all has said: ‘Cut down the trees around Jerusalem and build up a siege ramp against its walls. This is the city which is to be punished. Nothing but oppression happens in it.
JER 6:7 As a well continually pours out fresh water so it continually pours out wicked deeds. Sounds of violence and destruction echo throughout it. All I see are sick and wounded people.’
JER 6:8 So take warning, Jerusalem, or I will abandon you in disgust and make you desolate, a place where no one can live.”
JER 6:9 This is what the Lord who rules over all said to me: “Those who remain in Israel will be like the grapes thoroughly gleaned from a vine. So go over them again, as though you were a grape harvester passing your hand over the branches one last time.”
JER 6:10 I answered, “Who would listen if I spoke to them and warned them? Their ears are so closed that they cannot hear! Indeed, what the Lord says is offensive to them. They do not like it at all.
JER 6:11 I am as full of anger as you are, Lord, I am tired of trying to hold it in.” The Lord answered, “Vent it, then, on the children who play in the street and on the young men who are gathered together. Husbands and wives are to be included, as well as the old and those who are advanced in years.
JER 6:12 Their houses will be turned over to others as will their fields and their wives. For I will unleash my power against those who live in this land,” says the Lord.
JER 6:13 “That is because, from the least important to the most important of them, all of them are greedy for dishonest gain. Prophets and priests alike, all of them practice deceit.
JER 6:14 They offer only superficial help for the harm my people have suffered. They say, ‘Everything will be all right!’ But everything is not all right!
JER 6:15 Are they ashamed because they have done such shameful things? No, they are not at all ashamed. They do not even know how to blush! So they will die, just like others have died. They will be brought to ruin when I punish them,” says the Lord.
JER 6:16 The Lord said to his people: “You are standing at the crossroads. So consider your path. Ask where the old, reliable paths are. Ask where the path is that leads to blessing and follow it. If you do, you will find rest for your souls.” But they said, “We will not follow it!”
JER 6:17 The Lord said, “I appointed prophets as watchmen to warn you, saying: ‘Pay attention to the warning sound of the trumpet!’” But they said, “We will not pay attention!”
JER 6:18 So the Lord said, “Hear, you nations! Be witnesses and take note of what will happen to these people.
JER 6:19 Hear this, you peoples of the earth: ‘Take note! I am about to bring disaster on these people. It will come as punishment for their scheming. For they have paid no attention to what I have said, and they have rejected my law.
JER 6:20 I take no delight when they offer up to me frankincense that comes from Sheba or sweet-smelling cane imported from a faraway land. I cannot accept the burnt offerings they bring me. I get no pleasure from the sacrifices they offer to me.’
JER 6:21 So, this is what the Lord says: ‘I will assuredly make these people stumble to their doom. Parents and children will stumble and fall to their destruction. Friends and neighbors will die.’
JER 6:22 “This is what the Lord says: ‘Beware! An army is coming from a land in the north. A mighty nation is stirring into action in faraway parts of the earth.
JER 6:23 Its soldiers are armed with bows and spears. They are cruel and show no mercy. They sound like the roaring sea as they ride forth on their horses. Lined up in formation like men going into battle to attack you, Daughter Zion.’”
JER 6:24 The people cry out, “We have heard reports about them! We have become helpless with fear! Anguish grips us, agony like that of a woman giving birth to a baby!
JER 6:25 Do not go out into the countryside. Do not travel on the roads. For the enemy is there with sword in hand. They are spreading terror everywhere.”
JER 6:26 So I said, “Oh, my dear people, put on sackcloth and roll in ashes. Mourn with painful sobs as though you had lost your only child. For any moment now that destructive army will come against us.”
JER 6:27 The Lord said to me, “I have made you like a metal assayer to test my people like ore. You are to observe them and evaluate how they behave.”
JER 6:28 I reported, “All of them are the most stubborn of rebels! They are as hard as bronze or iron. They go about telling lies. They all deal corruptly.
JER 6:29 The fiery bellows of judgment burn fiercely. But there is too much dross to be removed. The process of refining them has proved useless. The wicked have not been purged.
JER 6:30 They are regarded as ‘rejected silver’ because the Lord rejects them.”
JER 7:1 The Lord said to Jeremiah:
JER 7:2 “Stand in the gate of the Lord’s temple and proclaim this message: ‘Listen, all you people of Judah who have passed through these gates to worship the Lord. Hear what the Lord has to say.
JER 7:3 The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says: Change the way you have been living and do what is right. If you do, I will allow you to continue to live in this land.
JER 7:4 Stop putting your confidence in the false belief that says, “We are safe! The temple of the Lord is here! The temple of the Lord is here! The temple of the Lord is here!”
JER 7:5 You must change the way you have been living and do what is right. You must treat one another fairly.
JER 7:6 Stop oppressing foreigners who live in your land, children who have lost their fathers, and women who have lost their husbands. Stop killing innocent people in this land. Stop paying allegiance to other gods. That will only bring about your ruin.
JER 7:7 If you stop doing these things, I will allow you to continue to live in this land which I gave to your ancestors as a lasting possession.
JER 7:8 “‘But just look at you! You are putting your confidence in a false belief that will not deliver you.
JER 7:9 You steal. You murder. You commit adultery. You lie when you swear on oath. You sacrifice to the god Baal. You pay allegiance to other gods whom you have not previously known.
JER 7:10 Then you come and stand in my presence in this temple I have claimed as my own and say, “We are safe!” You think you are so safe that you go on doing all those hateful sins!
JER 7:11 Do you think this temple I have claimed as my own is to be a hideout for robbers? You had better take note! I have seen for myself what you have done! says the Lord.
JER 7:12 So, go to the place in Shiloh where I allowed myself to be worshiped in the early days. See what I did to it because of the wicked things my people Israel did.
JER 7:13 You also have done all these things, says the Lord, and I have spoken to you over and over again. But you have not listened! You have refused to respond when I called you to repent!
JER 7:14 So I will destroy this temple which I have claimed as my own, this temple that you are trusting to protect you. I will destroy this place that I gave to you and your ancestors, just like I destroyed Shiloh.
JER 7:15 And I will drive you out of my sight just like I drove out your relatives, the people of Israel.’”
JER 7:16 Then the Lord said, “As for you, Jeremiah, do not pray for these people! Do not cry out to me or petition me on their behalf! Do not plead with me to save them, because I will not listen to you.
JER 7:17 Do you see what they are doing in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
JER 7:18 Children are gathering firewood, fathers are building fires with it, and women are mixing dough to bake cakes to offer to the goddess they call the Queen of Heaven. They are also pouring out drink offerings to other gods. They seem to do all this just to trouble me.
JER 7:19 But I am not really the one being troubled!” says the Lord. “Rather they are bringing trouble on themselves to their own shame!
JER 7:20 So,” the Lord God says, “my raging fury will be poured out on this land. It will be poured out on human beings and animals, on trees and crops. And it will burn like a fire which cannot be extinguished.”
JER 7:21 The Lord said to the people of Judah, “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says: ‘You might as well go ahead and add the meat of your burnt offerings to that of the other sacrifices and eat it, too!
JER 7:22 Consider this: When I spoke to your ancestors after I brought them out of Egypt, I did not merely give them commands about burnt offerings and sacrifices.
JER 7:23 I also explicitly commanded them: “Obey me. If you do, I will be your God and you will be my people. Live exactly the way I tell you and things will go well with you.”
JER 7:24 But they did not listen to me or pay any attention to me. They followed the stubborn inclinations of their own wicked hearts. They acted worse and worse instead of better.
JER 7:25 From the time your ancestors departed the land of Egypt until now, I sent my servants the prophets to you again and again, day after day.
JER 7:26 But your ancestors did not listen to me nor pay attention to me. They became obstinate and were more wicked than even their own forefathers.’”
JER 7:27 Then the Lord said to me, “When you tell them all this, they will not listen to you. When you call out to them, they will not respond to you.
JER 7:28 So tell them: ‘This is a nation that has not obeyed the Lord their God and has not accepted correction. Faithfulness is nowhere to be found in it. These people do not even profess it anymore.
JER 7:29 So, mourn, you people of this nation. Cut off your hair and throw it away. Sing a song of mourning on the hilltops. For the Lord has decided to reject and forsake this generation that has provoked his wrath!’”
JER 7:30 The Lord says, “I have rejected them because the people of Judah have done what I consider evil. They have set up their disgusting idols in the temple which I have claimed for my own and have defiled it.
JER 7:31 They have also built places of worship in a place called Topheth in the Valley of Ben Hinnom so that they can sacrifice their sons and daughters by fire. That is something I never commanded them to do! Indeed, it never even entered my mind to command such a thing!
JER 7:32 So, watch out!” says the Lord. “The time will soon come when people will no longer call those places Topheth or the Valley of Ben Hinnom. But they will call that valley the Valley of Slaughter and they will bury so many people in Topheth they will run out of room.
JER 7:33 Then the dead bodies of these people will be left on the ground for the birds and wild animals to eat. There will not be any survivors to scare them away.
JER 7:34 I will put an end to the sounds of joy and gladness, or the glad celebration of brides and grooms throughout the towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem. For the whole land will become a desolate wasteland.”
JER 8:1 The Lord says, “When that time comes, the bones of the kings of Judah and its leaders, the bones of the priests and prophets and of all the other people who lived in Jerusalem will be dug up from their graves.
JER 8:2 They will be spread out and exposed to the sun, the moon and the stars. These are things they adored and served, things to which they paid allegiance, from which they sought guidance, and worshiped. The bones of these people will never be regathered and reburied. They will be like manure used to fertilize the ground.
JER 8:3 However, I will leave some of these wicked people alive and banish them to other places. But wherever these people who survive may go, they will wish they had died rather than lived,” says the Lord who rules over all.
JER 8:4 The Lord said to me, “Tell them, ‘The Lord says, Do people not get back up when they fall down? Do they not turn around when they go the wrong way?
JER 8:5 Why, then, do these people of Jerusalem continually turn away from me in apostasy? They hold fast to their deception. They refuse to turn back to me.
JER 8:6 I have listened to them very carefully, but they do not speak honestly. None of them regrets the evil he has done. None of them says, “I have done wrong!” All of them persist in their own wayward course like a horse charging recklessly into battle.
JER 8:7 Even the stork knows when it is time to move on. The turtledove, swallow, and crane recognize the normal times for their migration. But my people pay no attention to what I, the Lord, require of them.
JER 8:8 How can you say, “We are wise! We have the law of the Lord”? The truth is, those who teach it have used their writings to make it say what it does not really mean.
JER 8:9 Your wise men will be put to shame. They will be dumbfounded and be brought to judgment. Since they have rejected the word of the Lord, what wisdom do they really have?
JER 8:10 So I will give their wives to other men and their fields to new owners. For from the least important to the most important of them, all of them are greedy for dishonest gain. Prophets and priests alike, all practice deceit.
JER 8:11 They offer only superficial help for the hurt my dear people have suffered. They say, “Everything will be all right!” But everything is not all right!
JER 8:12 Are they ashamed because they have done such disgusting things? No, they are not at all ashamed! They do not even know how to blush! So they will die just like others have died. They will be brought to ruin when I punish them, says the Lord.
JER 8:13 I will take away their harvests, says the Lord. There will be no grapes on their vines. There will be no figs on their fig trees. Even the leaves on their trees will wither. The crops that I gave them will be taken away.’”
JER 8:14 The people say, “Why are we just sitting here? Let us gather together inside the fortified cities. Let us at least die there fighting, since the Lord our God has condemned us to die. He has condemned us to drink the poison waters of judgment because we have sinned against him.
JER 8:15 We hoped for good fortune, but nothing good has come of it. We hoped for a time of relief, but instead we experience terror.
JER 8:16 The snorting of the enemy’s horses is already being heard in the city of Dan. The sound of the neighing of their stallions causes the whole land to tremble with fear. They are coming to destroy the land and everything in it! They are coming to destroy the cities and everyone who lives in them!”
JER 8:17 The Lord says, “Yes indeed, I am sending an enemy against you that will be like poisonous snakes which cannot be charmed away. And they will inflict fatal wounds on you.”
JER 8:18 Then I said, “There is no cure for my grief! I am sick at heart!
JER 8:19 I hear my dear people crying out throughout the length and breadth of the land. They are crying, ‘Is the Lord no longer in Zion? Is her divine King no longer there?’” The Lord answers, “Why then do they provoke me to anger with their images, with their worthless foreign idols?”
JER 8:20 “They cry, ‘Harvest time has come and gone, and the summer is over, and still we have not been delivered.’
JER 8:21 My heart is crushed because my dear people are being crushed. I go about crying and grieving. I am overwhelmed with dismay.
JER 8:22 There is still medicinal ointment available in Gilead! There is still a physician there! Why then have my dear people not been restored to health?
JER 9:1 I wish that my head were a well full of water and my eyes were a fountain full of tears! If they were, I could cry day and night for those of my dear people who have been killed.
JER 9:2 I wish I had a lodging place in the desert where I could spend some time like a weary traveler. Then I would desert my people and walk away from them because they are all unfaithful to God, a congregation of people that has been disloyal to him.
JER 9:3 The Lord says, “These people are like soldiers who have readied their bows. Their tongues are always ready to shoot out lies. They have become powerful in the land, but they have not done so by honest means. Indeed, they do one evil thing after another and do not pay attention to me.
JER 9:4 Everyone must be on his guard around his friends. He must not even trust any of his relatives. For every one of them will find some way to cheat him. And all of his friends will tell lies about him.
JER 9:5 One friend deceives another and no one tells the truth. These people have trained themselves to tell lies. They do wrong and are unable to repent.
JER 9:6 They do one act of violence after another, and one deceitful thing after another. They refuse to pay attention to me,” says the Lord.
JER 9:7 Therefore the Lord who rules over all says, “I will now purify them in the fires of affliction and test them. The wickedness of my dear people has left me no choice. What else can I do?
JER 9:8 Their tongues are like deadly arrows. They are always telling lies. Friendly words for their neighbors come from their mouths. But their minds are thinking up ways to trap them.
JER 9:9 I will certainly punish them for doing such things!” says the Lord. “I will certainly bring retribution on such a nation as this!”
JER 9:10 I said, “I will weep and mourn for the grasslands on the mountains, I will sing a mournful song for the pastures in the wilderness because they are so scorched no one travels through them. The sound of livestock is no longer heard there. Even the birds in the sky and the wild animals in the fields have fled and are gone.”
JER 9:11 The Lord said, “I will make Jerusalem a heap of ruins. Jackals will make their home there. I will destroy the towns of Judah so that no one will be able to live in them.”
JER 9:12 I said, “Who is wise enough to understand why this has happened? Who has a word from the Lord that can explain it? Why does the land lie in ruins? Why is it as scorched as a desert through which no one travels?”
JER 9:13 The Lord answered, “This has happened because these people have rejected my laws which I gave them. They have not obeyed me or followed those laws.
JER 9:14 Instead they have followed the stubborn inclinations of their own hearts. They have paid allegiance to the gods called Baal, as their fathers taught them to do.
JER 9:15 So then, listen to what I, the Lord God of Israel who rules over all, say. ‘I will make these people eat the bitter food of suffering and drink the poison water of judgment.
JER 9:16 I will scatter them among nations that neither they nor their ancestors have known anything about. I will send people chasing after them with swords until I have destroyed them.’”
JER 9:17 The Lord who rules over all told me to say to this people, “Take note of what I say. Call for the women who mourn for the dead! Summon those who are the most skilled at it!”
JER 9:18 I said, “Indeed, let them come quickly and sing a song of mourning for us. Let them wail loudly until tears stream from our own eyes and our eyelids overflow with water.
JER 9:19 For the sound of wailing is soon to be heard in Zion. They will wail, ‘We are utterly ruined! We are completely disgraced! For our houses have been torn down and we must leave our land.’”
JER 9:20 I said, “So now, you wailing women, hear what the Lord says. Open your ears to the words from his mouth. Teach your daughters this mournful song, and each of you teach your neighbor this lament.
JER 9:21 ‘Death has climbed in through our windows. It has entered into our fortified houses. It has taken away our children who play in the streets. It has taken away our young men who gather in the city squares.’
JER 9:22 Tell your daughters and neighbors, ‘The Lord says, “The dead bodies of people will lie scattered everywhere like manure scattered on a field. They will lie scattered on the ground like grain that has been cut down but has not been gathered.”’”
JER 9:23 The Lord says, “Wise people should not boast that they are wise. Powerful people should not boast that they are powerful. Rich people should not boast that they are rich.
JER 9:24 If people want to boast, they should boast about this: They should boast that they understand and know me. They should boast that they know and understand that I, the Lord, act out of faithfulness, fairness, and justice in the earth and that I desire people to do these things,” says the Lord.
JER 9:25 The Lord says, “Watch out! The time is soon coming when I will punish all those who are circumcised only in the flesh.
JER 9:26 That is, I will punish the Egyptians, the Judeans, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and all the desert people who cut their hair short at the temples. I will do so because none of the people of those nations are really circumcised in the Lord’s sight. Moreover, none of the people of Israel are circumcised when it comes to their hearts.”
JER 10:1 You people of Israel, listen to what the Lord has to say to you.
JER 10:2 The Lord says, “Do not start following pagan religious practices. Do not be in awe of signs that occur in the sky even though the nations hold them in awe.
JER 10:3 For the religion of these people is worthless. They cut down a tree in the forest, and a craftsman makes it into an idol with his tools.
JER 10:4 He decorates it with overlays of silver and gold. He uses hammer and nails to fasten it together so that it will not fall over.
JER 10:5 Such idols are like scarecrows in a cucumber field. They cannot talk. They must be carried because they cannot walk. Do not be afraid of them because they cannot hurt you. And they do not have any power to help you.”
JER 10:6 I said, “There is no one like you, Lord. You are great. And you are renowned for your power.
JER 10:7 Everyone should revere you, O King of all nations, because you deserve to be revered. For there is no one like you among any of the wise people of the nations nor among any of their kings.
JER 10:8 The people of those nations are both stupid and foolish. Instruction from a wooden idol is worthless!
JER 10:9 Hammered-out silver is brought from Tarshish and gold is brought from Uphaz to cover those idols. They are the handiwork of carpenters and goldsmiths. They are clothed in blue and purple clothes. They are all made by skillful workers.
JER 10:10 The Lord is the only true God. He is the living God and the everlasting King. When he shows his anger the earth shakes. None of the nations can stand up to his fury.
JER 10:11 You people of Israel should tell those nations this: ‘These gods did not make heaven and earth. They will disappear from the earth and from under the heavens.’
JER 10:12 The Lord is the one who by his power made the earth. He is the one who by his wisdom established the world. And by his understanding he spread out the skies.
JER 10:13 When his voice thunders, the heavenly ocean roars. He makes the clouds rise from the far-off horizons. He makes the lightning flash out in the midst of the rain. He unleashes the wind from the places where he stores it.
JER 10:14 All these idolaters will prove to be stupid and ignorant. Every goldsmith will be disgraced by the idol he made. For the image he forges is merely a sham. There is no breath in any of those idols.
JER 10:15 They are worthless, mere objects to be mocked. When the time comes to punish them, they will be destroyed.
JER 10:16 The Lord, who is the inheritance of Jacob’s descendants, is not like them. He is the one who created everything. And the people of Israel are those he claims as his own. He is known as the Lord who rules over all.”
JER 10:17 Gather your belongings together and prepare to leave the land, you people of Jerusalem who are being besieged.
JER 10:18 For the Lord says, “I will now throw out those who live in this land. I will bring so much trouble on them that they will actually feel it.”
JER 10:19 And I cried out, “We are doomed! Our wound is severe! We once thought, ‘This is only an illness. And we will be able to bear it!’
JER 10:20 But our tents have been destroyed. The ropes that held them in place have been ripped apart. Our children are gone and are not coming back. There is no survivor to put our tents back up, no one left to hang their tent curtains in place.
JER 10:21 For our leaders are stupid. They have not sought the Lord’s advice. So they do not act wisely, and the people they are responsible for have all been scattered.
JER 10:22 Listen! News is coming even now. The rumble of a great army is heard approaching from a land in the north. It is coming to turn the towns of Judah into rubble, places where only jackals live.
JER 10:23 Lord, we know that people do not control their own destiny. It is not in their power to determine what will happen to them.
JER 10:24 Correct us, Lord, but only in due measure. Do not punish us in anger or you will reduce us to nothing.
JER 10:25 Vent your anger on the nations that do not acknowledge you. Vent it on the peoples who do not worship you. For they have destroyed the people of Jacob. They have completely destroyed them and left their homeland in utter ruin.
JER 11:1 The Lord said to Jeremiah:
JER 11:2 “Hear the terms of the covenant I made with Israel and pass them on to the people of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem.
JER 11:3 Tell them that the Lord, the God of Israel, says, ‘Anyone who does not keep the terms of the covenant will be under a curse.
JER 11:4 Those are the terms that I charged your ancestors to keep when I brought them out of Egypt, that place which was like an iron-smelting furnace. I said at that time, “Obey me and carry out the terms of the agreement exactly as I commanded you. If you do, you will be my people and I will be your God.
JER 11:5 Then I will keep the promise I swore on oath to your ancestors to give them a land flowing with milk and honey.” That is the very land that you still live in today.’” And I responded, “Amen! Let it be so, Lord!”
JER 11:6 The Lord said to me, “Announce all the following words in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: ‘Listen to the terms of my covenant with you and carry them out!
JER 11:7 For I solemnly warned your ancestors to obey me. I warned them again and again, ever since I delivered them out of Egypt until this very day.
JER 11:8 But they did not listen to me or pay any attention to me! Each one of them followed the stubborn inclinations of his own wicked heart. So I brought on them all the punishments threatened in the covenant because they did not carry out its terms as I commanded them to do.’”
JER 11:9 The Lord said to me, “The people of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem have plotted rebellion against me!
JER 11:10 They have gone back to the evil ways of their ancestors of old who refused to obey what I told them. They, too, have paid allegiance to other gods and worshiped them. Both the nation of Israel and the nation of Judah have violated the covenant I made with their ancestors.
JER 11:11 So I, the Lord, say this: ‘I will soon bring disaster on them which they will not be able to escape! When they cry out to me for help, I will not listen to them.
JER 11:12 Then those living in the towns of Judah and in Jerusalem will go and cry out for help to the gods to whom they have been sacrificing. However, those gods will by no means be able to save them when disaster strikes them.
JER 11:13 This is in spite of the fact that the people of Judah have as many gods as they have towns and the citizens of Jerusalem have set up as many altars to sacrifice to that disgusting god, Baal, as they have streets in the city!’
JER 11:14 So, Jeremiah, do not pray for these people. Do not cry out to me or petition me on their behalf. Do not plead with me to save them. For I will not listen to them when they call out to me for help when disaster strikes them.”
JER 11:15 The Lord says to the people of Judah, “What right do you have to be in my temple, my beloved people? Many of you have done wicked things. Can your acts of treachery be so easily canceled by sacred offerings that you take joy in doing evil even while you make them?
JER 11:16 I, the Lord, once called you a thriving olive tree, one that produced beautiful fruit. But I will set you on fire, fire that will blaze with a mighty roar. Then all your branches will be good for nothing.
JER 11:17 For though I, the Lord who rules over all, planted you in the land, I now decree that disaster will come on you because the nations of Israel and Judah have done evil and have made me angry by offering sacrifices to the god Baal.”
JER 11:18 The Lord gave me knowledge, that I might have understanding. Then he showed me what the people were doing.
JER 11:19 Before this I had been like a docile lamb ready to be led to the slaughter. I did not know they were making plans to kill me. I did not know they were saying, “Let’s destroy the tree along with its fruit! Let’s remove Jeremiah from the world of the living so people will not even be reminded of him any more.”
JER 11:20 So I said to the Lord, “O Lord who rules over all, you are a just judge! You examine people’s hearts and minds. I want to see you pay them back for what they have done because I trust you to vindicate my cause.”
JER 11:21 Then the Lord told me about some men from Anathoth who were threatening to kill me. They had threatened, “Stop prophesying in the name of the Lord or we will kill you!”
JER 11:22 So the Lord who rules over all said, “I will surely punish them! Their young men will be killed in battle. Their sons and daughters will die of starvation.
JER 11:23 Not one of them will survive. I will bring disaster on those men from Anathoth who threatened you. A day of reckoning is coming for them.”
JER 12:1 Lord, you have always been fair whenever I have complained to you. However, I would like to speak with you about the disposition of justice. Why are wicked people successful? Why do all dishonest people have such easy lives?
JER 12:2 You plant them like trees and they put down their roots. They grow prosperous and are very fruitful. They always talk about you, but they really care nothing about you.
JER 12:3 But you, Lord, know all about me. You watch me and test my devotion to you. Drag these wicked men away like sheep to be slaughtered! Appoint a time when they will be killed!
JER 12:4 How long must the land be parched and the grass in every field be withered? How long must the animals and the birds die because of the wickedness of the people who live in this land? For these people boast, “God will not see what happens to us.”
JER 12:5 The Lord answered, “If you have raced on foot against men and they have worn you out, how will you be able to compete with horses? And if you feel secure only in safe and open country, how will you manage in the thick undergrowth along the Jordan River?
JER 12:6 As a matter of fact, even your own brothers and the members of your own family have betrayed you too. Even they have plotted to do away with you. So do not trust them even when they say kind things to you.
JER 12:7 “I will abandon my nation. I will forsake the people I call my own. I will turn my beloved people over to the power of their enemies.
JER 12:8 The people I call my own have turned on me like a lion in the forest. They have roared defiantly at me. So I will treat them as though I hate them.
JER 12:9 The people I call my own attack me like birds of prey or like hyenas. But other birds of prey are all around them. Let all the nations gather together like wild beasts. Let them come and destroy these people I call my own.
JER 12:10 Many foreign rulers will ruin the land where I planted my people. They will trample all over my chosen land. They will turn my beautiful land into a desolate wasteland.
JER 12:11 They will lay it waste. It will lie parched and empty before me. The whole land will be laid waste. But no one living in it will pay any heed.
JER 12:12 A destructive army will come marching over the hilltops in the desert. For the Lord will use them as his destructive weapon against everyone from one end of the land to the other. No one will be safe.
JER 12:13 My people will sow wheat, but will harvest weeds. They will work until they are exhausted, but will get nothing from it. They will be disappointed in their harvests because the Lord will take them away in his fierce anger.
JER 12:14 “I, the Lord, also have something to say concerning the wicked nations who surround my land and have attacked and plundered the land that I gave to my people as a permanent possession. I say: ‘I will uproot the people of those nations from their lands and I will free the people of Judah who have been taken there.
JER 12:15 But after I have uprooted the people of those nations, I will relent and have pity on them. I will restore the people of each of those nations to their own lands and to their own country.
JER 12:16 But they must make sure you learn to follow the religious practices of my people. Once they taught my people to swear their oaths using the name of the god Baal. But then, they must swear oaths using my name, saying, “As surely as the Lord lives, I swear.” If they do these things, then they will be included among the people I call my own.
JER 12:17 But I will completely uproot and destroy any of those nations that will not pay heed,’” says the Lord.
JER 13:1 The Lord said to me, “Go and buy some linen shorts and put them on. Do not put them in water.”
JER 13:2 So I bought the shorts as the Lord had told me to do and put them on.
JER 13:3 Then the Lord spoke to me again and said,
JER 13:4 “Take the shorts that you bought and are wearing and go at once to Perath. Bury the shorts there in a crack in the rocks.”
JER 13:5 So I went and buried them at Perath as the Lord had ordered me to do.
JER 13:6 Many days later the Lord said to me, “Go at once to Perath and get the shorts I ordered you to bury there.”
JER 13:7 So I went to Perath and dug up the shorts from the place where I had buried them. I found that they were ruined; they were good for nothing.
JER 13:8 Then the Lord said to me,
JER 13:9 “I, the Lord, say: ‘This shows how I will ruin the highly exalted position in which Judah and Jerusalem take pride.
JER 13:10 These wicked people refuse to obey what I have said. They follow the stubborn inclinations of their own hearts and pay allegiance to other gods by worshiping and serving them. So they will become just like these linen shorts which are good for nothing.
JER 13:11 For,’ I say, ‘just as shorts cling tightly to a person’s body, so I bound the whole nation of Israel and the whole nation of Judah tightly to me.’ I intended for them to be my special people and to bring me fame, honor, and praise. But they would not obey me.
JER 13:12 “So tell them, ‘The Lord, the God of Israel, says, “Every wine jar is made to be filled with wine.”’ And they will probably say to you, ‘Do you not think we know that every wine jar is supposed to be filled with wine?’
JER 13:13 Then tell them, ‘The Lord says, “I will soon fill all the people who live in this land with stupor. I will also fill the kings from David’s dynasty, the priests, the prophets, and the citizens of Jerusalem with stupor.
JER 13:14 And I will smash them like wine bottles against one another, children and parents alike. I will not show any pity, mercy, or compassion. Nothing will keep me from destroying them,’ says the Lord.”
JER 13:15 Then I said to the people of Judah, “Listen and pay attention! Do not be arrogant! For the Lord has spoken.
JER 13:16 Show the Lord your God the respect that is due him. Do it before he brings the darkness of disaster. Do it before you stumble into distress like a traveler on the mountains at twilight. Do it before he turns the light of deliverance you hope for into the darkness and gloom of exile.
JER 13:17 But if you will not pay attention to this warning, I will weep alone because of your arrogant pride. I will weep bitterly and my eyes will overflow with tears because you, the Lord’s flock, will be carried into exile.”
JER 13:18 The Lord told me, “Tell the king and the queen mother, ‘Surrender your thrones, for your glorious crowns will be removed from your heads.
JER 13:19 The gates of the towns in southern Judah will be shut tight. No one will be able to go in or out of them. All Judah will be carried off into exile. They will be completely carried off into exile.’”
JER 13:20 Then I said, “Look up, Jerusalem, and see the enemy that is coming from the north. Where now is the flock of people that were entrusted to your care? Where now are the ‘sheep’ that you take such pride in?
JER 13:21 What will you say when the Lord appoints as rulers over you those allies that you, yourself, had actually prepared as such? Then anguish and agony will grip you like that of a woman giving birth to a baby.
JER 13:22 You will probably ask yourself, ‘Why have these things happened to me? Why have I been treated like a disgraced adulteress whose skirt has been torn off and her limbs exposed?’ It is because you have sinned so much.
JER 13:23 But there is little hope for you ever doing good, you who are so accustomed to doing evil. Can an Ethiopian change the color of his skin? Can a leopard remove its spots?
JER 13:24 “The Lord says, ‘That is why I will scatter your people like chaff that is blown away by a desert wind.
JER 13:25 This is your fate, the destiny to which I have appointed you, because you have forgotten me and have trusted in false gods.
JER 13:26 So I will pull your skirt up over your face and expose you to shame like a disgraced adulteress!
JER 13:27 People of Jerusalem, I have seen your adulterous worship, your shameless prostitution to, and your lustful pursuit of, other gods. I have seen your disgusting acts of worship on the hills throughout the countryside. You are doomed to destruction! How long will you continue to be unclean?’”
JER 14:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah about the drought.
JER 14:2 “The people of Judah are in mourning. The people in her cities are pining away. They lie on the ground expressing their sorrow. Cries of distress come up to me from Jerusalem.
JER 14:3 The leading men of the cities send their servants for water. They go to the cisterns, but they do not find any water there. They return with their containers empty. Disappointed and dismayed, they bury their faces in their hands.
JER 14:4 They are dismayed because the ground is cracked because there has been no rain in the land. The farmers, too, are dismayed and bury their faces in their hands.
JER 14:5 Even the doe abandons her newborn fawn in the field because there is no grass.
JER 14:6 Wild donkeys stand on the hilltops and pant for breath like jackals. Their eyes are strained looking for food, because there is none to be found.”
JER 14:7 Then I said, “O Lord, intervene for the honor of your name even though our sins speak out against us. Indeed, we have turned away from you many times. We have sinned against you.
JER 14:8 You have been the object of Israel’s hopes. You have saved them when they were in trouble. Why have you become like a resident foreigner in the land? Why have you become like a traveler who only stops in to spend the night?
JER 14:9 Why should you be like someone who is helpless, like a champion who cannot save anyone? You are indeed with us, and we belong to you. Do not abandon us!”
JER 14:10 Then the Lord spoke about these people. “They truly love to go astray. They cannot keep from running away from me. So I am not pleased with them. I will now call to mind the wrongs they have done and punish them for their sins.”
JER 14:11 Then the Lord said to me, “Do not pray for good to come to these people!
JER 14:12 Even if they fast, I will not hear their cries for help. Even if they offer burnt offerings and grain offerings, I will not accept them. Instead, I will kill them through wars, famines, and plagues.”
JER 14:13 Then I said, “Oh, Lord God, look! The prophets are telling them that you said, ‘You will not experience war or suffer famine. I will give you lasting peace and prosperity in this land.’”
JER 14:14 Then the Lord said to me, “Those prophets are prophesying lies while claiming my authority! I did not send them. I did not commission them. I did not speak to them. They are prophesying to these people false visions, worthless predictions, and the delusions of their own mind.
JER 14:15 I did not send those prophets, though they claim to be prophesying in my name. They may be saying, ‘No war or famine will happen in this land.’ But I, the Lord, say this about them: ‘War and starvation will kill those prophets.’
JER 14:16 The people to whom they are prophesying will die through war and famine. Their bodies will be thrown out into the streets of Jerusalem and there will be no one to bury them. This will happen to the men and their wives, their sons, and their daughters. For I will pour out on them the destruction they deserve.”
JER 14:17 “Tell these people this, Jeremiah: ‘My eyes overflow with tears day and night without ceasing. For my people, my dear children, have suffered a crushing blow. They have suffered a serious wound.
JER 14:18 If I go out into the countryside, I see those who have been killed in battle. If I go into the city, I see those who are sick because of starvation. For both prophet and priest go about their own business in the land without having any real understanding.’”
JER 14:19 Then I said, “Lord, have you completely rejected the nation of Judah? Do you despise the city of Zion? Why have you struck us with such force that we are beyond recovery? We hope for peace, but nothing good has come of it. We hope for a time of relief from our troubles, but experience terror.
JER 14:20 Lord, we confess that we have been wicked. We confess that our ancestors have done wrong. We have indeed sinned against you.
JER 14:21 For the honor of your name, do not treat Jerusalem with contempt. Do not treat with disdain the place where your glorious throne sits. Be mindful of your covenant with us. Do not break it!
JER 14:22 Do any of the worthless idols of the nations cause rain to fall? Do the skies themselves send showers? Is it not you, O Lord our God, who does this? So we put our hopes in you because you alone do all this.”
JER 15:1 Then the Lord said to me, “Even if Moses and Samuel stood before me pleading for these people, I would not feel pity for them! Get them away from me! Tell them to go away!
JER 15:2 If they ask you, ‘Where should we go?’ tell them the Lord says this: “Those who are destined to die of disease will go to death by disease. Those who are destined to die in war will go to death in war. Those who are destined to die of starvation will go to death by starvation. Those who are destined to go into exile will go into exile.”
JER 15:3 “I will punish them in four different ways: I will have war kill them. I will have dogs drag off their dead bodies. I will have birds and wild beasts devour and destroy their corpses.
JER 15:4 I will make all the people in all the kingdoms of the world horrified at what has happened to them because of what Hezekiah’s son Manasseh, king of Judah, did in Jerusalem.”
JER 15:5 The Lord cried out, “Who in the world will have pity on you, Jerusalem? Who will grieve over you? Who will stop long enough to inquire about how you are doing?
JER 15:6 I, the Lord, say: ‘You people have deserted me! You keep turning your back on me.’ So I have unleashed my power against you and have begun to destroy you. I have grown tired of feeling sorry for you!”
JER 15:7 The Lord continued, “In every town in the land I will purge them like straw blown away by the wind. I will destroy my people. I will kill off their children. I will do so because they did not change their behavior.
JER 15:8 Their widows will become in my sight more numerous than the grains of sand on the seashores. At noontime I will bring a destroyer against the mothers of their young men. I will cause anguish and terror to fall suddenly upon them.
JER 15:9 The mother who had seven children will grow faint. All the breath will go out of her. Her pride and joy will be taken from her in the prime of their life. It will seem as if the sun had set while it was still day. She will suffer shame and humiliation. I will cause any of them who are still left alive to be killed in war by the onslaughts of their enemies,” says the Lord.
JER 15:10 I said, “Oh, mother, how I regret that you ever gave birth to me! I am always starting arguments and quarrels with the people of this land. I have not lent money to anyone and I have not borrowed from anyone. Yet all of these people are treating me with contempt.”
JER 15:11 The Lord said, “Jerusalem, I will surely send you away for your own good. I will surely bring the enemy upon you in a time of trouble and distress.
JER 15:12 Can you people who are like iron and bronze break that iron fist from the north?
JER 15:13 I will give away your wealth and your treasures as plunder. I will give it away free of charge for the sins you have committed throughout your land.
JER 15:14 I will make you serve your enemies in a land that you know nothing about. For my anger is like a fire that will burn against you.”
JER 15:15 I said, “Lord, you know how I suffer. Take thought of me and care for me. Pay back for me those who have been persecuting me. Do not be so patient with them that you allow them to kill me. Be mindful of how I have put up with their insults for your sake.
JER 15:16 As your words came to me I drank them in, and they filled my heart with joy and happiness because I belong to you.
JER 15:17 I did not spend my time in the company of other people, laughing and having a good time. I stayed to myself because I felt obligated to you and because I was filled with anger at what they had done.
JER 15:18 Why must I continually suffer such painful anguish? Why must I endure the sting of their insults like an incurable wound? Will you let me down when I need you like a brook one goes to for water, but that cannot be relied on?”
JER 15:19 Because of this, the Lord said, “You must repent of such words and thoughts! If you do, I will restore you to the privilege of serving me. If you say what is worthwhile instead of what is worthless, I will again allow you to be my spokesman. They must become as you have been. You must not become like them.
JER 15:20 I will make you as strong as a wall to these people, a fortified wall of bronze. They will attack you, but they will not be able to overcome you. For I will be with you to rescue you and deliver you,” says the Lord.
JER 15:21 “I will deliver you from the power of the wicked. I will free you from the clutches of violent people.”
JER 16:1 The Lord said to me,
JER 16:2 “Do not get married and do not have children here in this land.
JER 16:3 For I, the Lord, tell you what will happen to the children who are born here in this land and to the men and women who are their mothers and fathers.
JER 16:4 They will die of deadly diseases. No one will mourn for them. They will not be buried. Their dead bodies will lie like manure spread on the ground. They will be killed in war or die of starvation. Their corpses will be food for the birds and wild animals.
JER 16:5 “Moreover I, the Lord, tell you: ‘Do not go into a house where they are having a funeral meal. Do not go there to mourn and express your sorrow for them. For I have stopped showing them my good favor, my love, and my compassion. I, the Lord, so affirm it!
JER 16:6 Rich and poor alike will die in this land. They will not be buried or mourned. People will not cut their bodies or shave off their hair to show their grief for them.
JER 16:7 No one will take any food to those who mourn for the dead to comfort them. No one will give them any wine to drink to console them for the loss of their father or mother.
JER 16:8 “‘Do not go to a house where people are feasting and sit down to eat and drink with them either.
JER 16:9 For I, the Lord God of Israel who rules over all, tell you what will happen. I will put an end to the sounds of joy and gladness, to the glad celebration of brides and grooms in this land. You and the rest of the people will live to see this happen.’”
JER 16:10 “When you tell these people about all this, they will undoubtedly ask you, ‘Why has the Lord threatened us with such great disaster? What wrong have we done? What sin have we done to offend the Lord our God?’
JER 16:11 Then tell them that the Lord says, ‘It is because your ancestors rejected me and paid allegiance to other gods. They have served them and worshiped them. But they have rejected me and not obeyed my law.
JER 16:12 And you have acted even more wickedly than your ancestors! Each one of you has followed the stubborn inclinations of your own wicked heart and not obeyed me.
JER 16:13 So I will throw you out of this land into a land that neither you nor your ancestors have ever known. There you must worship other gods day and night, for I will show you no mercy.’”
JER 16:14 Yet I, the Lord, say: “A new time will certainly come. People now affirm their oaths with ‘I swear as surely as the Lord lives who delivered the people of Israel out of Egypt.’
JER 16:15 But in that time they will affirm them with ‘I swear as surely as the Lord lives who delivered the people of Israel from the land of the north and from all the other lands where he had banished them.’ At that time I will bring them back to the land I gave their ancestors.”
JER 16:16 But for now I, the Lord, say: “I will send many enemies who will catch these people like fishermen. After that I will send others who will hunt them out like hunters from all the mountains, all the hills, and the crevices in the rocks.
JER 16:17 For I see everything they do. Their wicked ways are not hidden from me. Their sin is not hidden away where I cannot see it.
JER 16:18 Before I restore them I will punish them in full for their sins and the wrongs they have done. For they have polluted my land with the lifeless statues of their disgusting idols. They have filled the land I have claimed as my own with their detestable idols.”
JER 16:19 Then I said, “Lord, you give me strength and protect me. You are the one I can run to for safety when I am in trouble. Nations from all over the earth will come to you and say, ‘Our ancestors had nothing but false gods – worthless idols that could not help them at all.
JER 16:20 Can people make their own gods? No, what they make are not gods at all.”
JER 16:21 The Lord said, “So I will now let this wicked people know – I will let them know my mighty power in judgment. Then they will know that my name is the Lord.”
JER 17:1 The sin of Judah is engraved with an iron chisel on their stone-hard hearts. It is inscribed with a diamond point on the horns of their altars.
JER 17:2 Their children are always thinking about their altars and their sacred poles dedicated to the goddess Asherah, set up beside the green trees on the high hills
JER 17:3 and on the mountains and in the fields. I will give your wealth and all your treasures away as plunder. I will give it away as the price for the sins you have committed throughout your land.
JER 17:4 You will lose your hold on the land which I gave to you as a permanent possession. I will make you serve your enemies in a land that you know nothing about. For you have made my anger burn like a fire that will never be put out.”
JER 17:5 The Lord says, “I will put a curse on people who trust in mere human beings, who depend on mere flesh and blood for their strength, and whose hearts have turned away from the Lord.
JER 17:6 They will be like a shrub in the desert. They will not experience good things even when they happen. It will be as though they were growing in the desert, in a salt land where no one can live.
JER 17:7 My blessing is on those people who trust in me, who put their confidence in me.
JER 17:8 They will be like a tree planted near a stream whose roots spread out toward the water. It has nothing to fear when the heat comes. Its leaves are always green. It has no need to be concerned in a year of drought. It does not stop bearing fruit.
JER 17:9 The human mind is more deceitful than anything else. It is incurably bad. Who can understand it?
JER 17:10 I, the Lord, probe into people’s minds. I examine people’s hearts. I deal with each person according to how he has behaved. I give them what they deserve based on what they have done.
JER 17:11 The person who gathers wealth by unjust means is like the partridge that broods over eggs but does not hatch them. Before his life is half over he will lose his ill-gotten gains. At the end of his life it will be clear he was a fool.”
JER 17:12 Then I said, “Lord, from the very beginning you have been seated on your glorious throne on high. You are the place where we can find refuge.
JER 17:13 You are the one in whom Israel may find hope. All who leave you will suffer shame. Those who turn away from you will be consigned to the nether world. For they have rejected you, the Lord, the fountain of life.
JER 17:14 Lord, grant me relief from my suffering so that I may have some relief. Rescue me from those who persecute me so that I may be rescued.
JER 17:15 Listen to what they are saying to me. They are saying, “Where are the things the Lord threatens us with? Come on! Let’s see them happen!”
JER 17:16 But I have not pestered you to bring disaster. I have not desired the time of irreparable devastation. You know that. You are fully aware of every word that I have spoken.
JER 17:17 Do not cause me dismay! You are my source of safety in times of trouble.
JER 17:18 May those who persecute me be disgraced. Do not let me be disgraced. May they be dismayed. Do not let me be dismayed. Bring days of disaster on them. Bring on them the destruction they deserve.”
JER 17:19 The Lord told me, “Go and stand in the People’s Gate through which the kings of Judah enter and leave the city. Then go and stand in all the other gates of the city of Jerusalem.
JER 17:20 As you stand in those places announce, ‘Listen, all you people who pass through these gates. Listen, all you kings of Judah, all you people of Judah and all you citizens of Jerusalem. Listen to what the Lord says.
JER 17:21 The Lord says, ‘Be very careful if you value your lives! Do not carry any loads in through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day.
JER 17:22 Do not carry any loads out of your houses or do any work on the Sabbath day. But observe the Sabbath day as a day set apart to the Lord, as I commanded your ancestors.
JER 17:23 Your ancestors, however, did not listen to me or pay any attention to me. They stubbornly refused to pay attention or to respond to any discipline.’
JER 17:24 The Lord says, ‘You must make sure to obey me. You must not bring any loads through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day. You must set the Sabbath day apart to me. You must not do any work on that day.
JER 17:25 If you do this, then the kings and princes who follow in David’s succession and ride in chariots or on horses will continue to enter through these gates, as well as their officials and the people of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem. This city will always be filled with people.
JER 17:26 Then people will come here from the towns in Judah, from the villages surrounding Jerusalem, from the territory of Benjamin, from the western foothills, from the southern hill country, and from the southern part of Judah. They will come bringing offerings to the temple of the Lord: burnt offerings, sacrifices, grain offerings, and incense along with their thank offerings.
JER 17:27 But you must obey me and set the Sabbath day apart to me. You must not carry any loads in through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. If you disobey, I will set the gates of Jerusalem on fire. It will burn down all the fortified dwellings in Jerusalem and no one will be able to put it out.’”
JER 18:1 The Lord said to Jeremiah:
JER 18:2 “Go down at once to the potter’s house. I will speak to you further there.”
JER 18:3 So I went down to the potter’s house and found him working at his wheel.
JER 18:4 Now and then there would be something wrong with the pot he was molding from the clay with his hands. So he would rework the clay into another kind of pot as he saw fit.
JER 18:5 Then the Lord said to me,
JER 18:6 “I, the Lord, say: ‘O nation of Israel, can I not deal with you as this potter deals with the clay? In my hands, you, O nation of Israel, are just like the clay in this potter’s hand.’
JER 18:7 There are times, Jeremiah, when I threaten to uproot, tear down, and destroy a nation or kingdom.
JER 18:8 But if that nation I threatened stops doing wrong, I will cancel the destruction I intended to do to it.
JER 18:9 And there are times when I promise to build up and establish a nation or kingdom.
JER 18:10 But if that nation does what displeases me and does not obey me, then I will cancel the good I promised to do to it.
JER 18:11 So now, tell the people of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem this: The Lord says, ‘I am preparing to bring disaster on you! I am making plans to punish you. So, every one of you, stop the evil things you have been doing. Correct the way you have been living and do what is right.’
JER 18:12 But they just keep saying, ‘We do not care what you say! We will do whatever we want to do! We will continue to behave wickedly and stubbornly!’”
JER 18:13 Therefore, the Lord says, “Ask the people of other nations whether they have heard of anything like this. Israel should have been like a virgin. But she has done something utterly revolting!
JER 18:14 Does the snow ever completely vanish from the rocky slopes of Lebanon? Do the cool waters from those distant mountains ever cease to flow?
JER 18:15 Yet my people have forgotten me and offered sacrifices to worthless idols! This makes them stumble along in the way they live and leave the old reliable path of their fathers. They have left them to walk in bypaths, in roads that are not smooth and level.
JER 18:16 So their land will become an object of horror. People will forever hiss out their scorn over it. All who pass that way will be filled with horror and will shake their heads in derision.
JER 18:17 I will scatter them before their enemies like dust blowing in front of a burning east wind. I will turn my back on them and not look favorably on them when disaster strikes them.”
JER 18:18 Then some people said, “Come on! Let us consider how to deal with Jeremiah! There will still be priests to instruct us, wise men to give us advice, and prophets to declare God’s word. Come on! Let’s bring charges against him and get rid of him! Then we will not need to pay attention to anything he says.”
JER 18:19 Then I said, “Lord, pay attention to me. Listen to what my enemies are saying.
JER 18:20 Should good be paid back with evil? Yet they are virtually digging a pit to kill me. Just remember how I stood before you pleading on their behalf to keep you from venting your anger on them.
JER 18:21 So let their children die of starvation. Let them be cut down by the sword. Let their wives lose their husbands and children. Let the older men die of disease and the younger men die by the sword in battle.
JER 18:22 Let cries of terror be heard in their houses when you send bands of raiders unexpectedly to plunder them. For they have virtually dug a pit to capture me and have hidden traps for me to step into.
JER 18:23 But you, Lord, know all their plots to kill me. Do not pardon their crimes! Do not ignore their sins as though you had erased them! Let them be brought down in defeat before you! Deal with them while you are still angry!
JER 19:1 The Lord told Jeremiah, “Go and buy a clay jar from a potter. Take with you some of the leaders of the people and some of the leaders of the priests.
JER 19:2 Go out to the part of the Hinnom Valley which is near the entrance of the Potsherd Gate. Announce there what I tell you.
JER 19:3 Say, ‘Listen to what the Lord says, you kings of Judah and citizens of Jerusalem! The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “I will bring a disaster on this place that will make the ears of everyone who hears about it ring!
JER 19:4 I will do so because these people have rejected me and have defiled this place. They have offered sacrifices in it to other gods which neither they nor their ancestors nor the kings of Judah knew anything about. They have filled it with the blood of innocent children.
JER 19:5 They have built places here for worship of the god Baal so that they could sacrifice their children as burnt offerings to him in the fire. Such sacrifices are something I never commanded them to make! They are something I never told them to do! Indeed, such a thing never even entered my mind!
JER 19:6 So I, the Lord, say: “The time will soon come that people will no longer call this place Topheth or the Hinnom Valley. But they will call this valley the Valley of Slaughter!
JER 19:7 In this place I will thwart the plans of the people of Judah and Jerusalem. I will deliver them over to the power of their enemies who are seeking to kill them. They will die by the sword at the hands of their enemies. I will make their dead bodies food for the birds and wild beasts to eat.
JER 19:8 I will make this city an object of horror, a thing to be hissed at. All who pass by it will be filled with horror and will hiss out their scorn because of all the disasters that have happened to it.
JER 19:9 I will reduce the people of this city to desperate straits during the siege imposed on it by their enemies who are seeking to kill them. I will make them so desperate that they will eat the flesh of their own sons and daughters and the flesh of one another.”’”
JER 19:10 The Lord continued, “Now break the jar in front of those who have come here with you.
JER 19:11 Tell them the Lord who rules over all says, ‘I will do just as Jeremiah has done. I will smash this nation and this city as though it were a potter’s vessel which is broken beyond repair. The dead will be buried here in Topheth until there is no more room to bury them.’
JER 19:12 I, the Lord, say: ‘That is how I will deal with this city and its citizens. I will make it like Topheth.
JER 19:13 The houses in Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah will be defiled by dead bodies just like this place, Topheth. For they offered sacrifice to the stars and poured out drink offerings to other gods on the roofs of those houses.’”
JER 19:14 Then Jeremiah left Topheth where the Lord had sent him to give that prophecy. He went to the Lord’s temple and stood in its courtyard and called out to all the people.
JER 19:15 “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘I will soon bring on this city and all the towns surrounding it all the disaster I threatened to do to it. I will do so because they have stubbornly refused to pay any attention to what I have said!’”
JER 20:1 Now Pashhur son of Immer heard Jeremiah prophesy these things. He was the priest who was chief of security in the Lord’s temple.
JER 20:2 When he heard Jeremiah’s prophecy, he had the prophet flogged. Then he put him in the stocks which were at the Upper Gate of Benjamin in the Lord’s temple.
JER 20:3 But the next day Pashhur released Jeremiah from the stocks. When he did, Jeremiah said to him, “The Lord’s name for you is not ‘Pashhur’ but ‘Terror is Everywhere.’
JER 20:4 For the Lord says, ‘I will make both you and your friends terrified of what will happen to you. You will see all of them die by the swords of their enemies. I will hand all the people of Judah over to the king of Babylon. He will carry some of them away into exile in Babylon and he will kill others of them with the sword.
JER 20:5 I will hand over all the wealth of this city to their enemies. I will hand over to them all the fruits of the labor of the people of this city and all their prized possessions, as well as all the treasures of the kings of Judah. Their enemies will seize it all as plunder and carry it off to Babylon.
JER 20:6 You, Pashhur, and all your household will go into exile in Babylon. You will die there and you will be buried there. The same thing will happen to all your friends to whom you have prophesied lies.’”
JER 20:7 Lord, you coerced me into being a prophet, and I allowed you to do it. You overcame my resistance and prevailed over me. Now I have become a constant laughingstock. Everyone ridicules me.
JER 20:8 For whenever I prophesy, I must cry out, “Violence and destruction are coming!” This message from the Lord has made me an object of continual insults and derision.
JER 20:9 Sometimes I think, “I will make no mention of his message. I will not speak as his messenger any more.” But then his message becomes like a fire locked up inside of me, burning in my heart and soul. I grow weary of trying to hold it in; I cannot contain it.
JER 20:10 I hear many whispering words of intrigue against me. Those who would cause me terror are everywhere! They are saying, “Come on, let’s publicly denounce him!” All my so-called friends are just watching for something that would lead to my downfall. They say, “Perhaps he can be enticed into slipping up, so we can prevail over him and get our revenge on him.
JER 20:11 But the Lord is with me to help me like an awe-inspiring warrior. Therefore those who persecute me will fail and will not prevail over me. They will be thoroughly disgraced because they did not succeed. Their disgrace will never be forgotten.
JER 20:12 O Lord who rules over all, you test and prove the righteous. You see into people’s hearts and minds. Pay them back for what they have done because I trust you to vindicate my cause.
JER 20:13 Sing to the Lord! Praise the Lord! For he rescues the oppressed from the clutches of evildoers.
JER 20:14 Cursed be the day I was born! May that day not be blessed when my mother gave birth to me.
JER 20:15 Cursed be the man who made my father very glad when he brought him the news that a baby boy had been born to him!
JER 20:16 May that man be like the cities that the Lord destroyed without showing any mercy. May he hear a cry of distress in the morning and a battle cry at noon.
JER 20:17 For he did not kill me before I came from the womb, making my pregnant mother’s womb my grave forever.
JER 20:18 Why did I ever come forth from my mother’s womb? All I experience is trouble and grief, and I spend my days in shame.
JER 21:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah when King Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur son of Malkijah and the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah. Zedekiah sent them to Jeremiah to ask,
JER 21:2 “Please ask the Lord to come and help us, because King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon is attacking us. Maybe the Lord will perform one of his miracles as in times past and make him stop attacking us and leave.”
JER 21:3 Jeremiah answered them, “Tell Zedekiah
JER 21:4 that the Lord, the God of Israel, says, ‘The forces at your disposal are now outside the walls fighting against King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the Babylonians who have you under siege. I will gather those forces back inside the city.
JER 21:5 In anger, in fury, and in wrath I myself will fight against you with my mighty power and great strength!
JER 21:6 I will kill everything living in Jerusalem, people and animals alike! They will die from terrible diseases.
JER 21:7 Then I, the Lord, promise that I will hand over King Zedekiah of Judah, his officials, and any of the people who survive the war, starvation, and disease. I will hand them over to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and to their enemies who want to kill them. He will slaughter them with the sword. He will not show them any mercy, compassion, or pity.’
JER 21:8 “But tell the people of Jerusalem that the Lord says, ‘I will give you a choice between two courses of action. One will result in life; the other will result in death.
JER 21:9 Those who stay in this city will die in battle or of starvation or disease. Those who leave the city and surrender to the Babylonians who are besieging it will live. They will escape with their lives.
JER 21:10 For I, the Lord, say that I am determined not to deliver this city but to bring disaster on it. It will be handed over to the king of Babylon and he will destroy it with fire.’”
JER 21:11 The Lord told me to say to the royal court of Judah, “Listen to what the Lord says,
JER 21:12 O royal family descended from David. The Lord says: ‘See to it that people each day are judged fairly. Deliver those who have been robbed from those who oppress them. Otherwise, my wrath will blaze out against you. It will burn like a fire that cannot be put out because of the evil that you have done.
JER 21:13 Listen, you who sit enthroned above the valley on a rocky plateau. I am opposed to you,’ says the Lord. ‘You boast, “No one can swoop down on us. No one can penetrate into our places of refuge.”
JER 21:14 But I will punish you as your deeds deserve,’ says the Lord. ‘I will set fire to your palace; it will burn up everything around it.’”
JER 22:1 The Lord told me, “Go down to the palace of the king of Judah. Give him a message from me there.
JER 22:2 Say: ‘Listen, O king of Judah who follows in David’s succession. You, your officials, and your subjects who pass through the gates of this palace must listen to what the Lord says.
JER 22:3 The Lord says, “Do what is just and right. Deliver those who have been robbed from those who oppress them. Do not exploit or mistreat foreigners who live in your land, children who have no fathers, or widows. Do not kill innocent people in this land.
JER 22:4 If you are careful to obey these commands, then the kings who follow in David’s succession and ride in chariots or on horses will continue to come through the gates of this palace, as will their officials and their subjects.
JER 22:5 But, if you do not obey these commands, I solemnly swear that this palace will become a pile of rubble. I, the Lord, affirm it!”
JER 22:6 “‘For the Lord says concerning the palace of the king of Judah, “This place looks like a veritable forest of Gilead to me. It is like the wooded heights of Lebanon in my eyes. But I swear that I will make it like a wilderness whose towns have all been deserted.
JER 22:7 I will send men against it to destroy it with their axes and hatchets. They will hack up its fine cedar panels and columns and throw them into the fire.
JER 22:8 “‘People from other nations will pass by this city. They will ask one another, “Why has the Lord done such a thing to this great city?”
JER 22:9 The answer will come back, “It is because they broke their covenant with the Lord their God and worshiped and served other gods.”
JER 22:10 “‘Do not weep for the king who was killed. Do not grieve for him. But weep mournfully for the king who has gone into exile. For he will never return to see his native land again.
JER 22:11 “‘For the Lord has spoken about Shallum son of Josiah, who succeeded his father as king of Judah but was carried off into exile. He has said, “He will never return to this land.
JER 22:12 For he will die in the country where they took him as a captive. He will never see this land again.”
JER 22:13 “‘Sure to be judged is the king who builds his palace using injustice and treats people unfairly while adding its upper rooms. He makes his countrymen work for him for nothing. He does not pay them for their labor.
JER 22:14 He says, “I will build myself a large palace with spacious upper rooms.” He cuts windows in its walls, panels it with cedar, and paints its rooms red.
JER 22:15 Does it make you any more of a king that you outstrip everyone else in building with cedar? Just think about your father. He was content that he had food and drink. He did what was just and right. So things went well with him.
JER 22:16 He upheld the cause of the poor and needy. So things went well for Judah.’ The Lord says, ‘That is a good example of what it means to know me.’
JER 22:17 But you are always thinking and looking for ways to increase your wealth by dishonest means. Your eyes and your heart are set on killing some innocent person and committing fraud and oppression.
JER 22:18 So the Lord has this to say about Josiah’s son, King Jehoiakim of Judah: People will not mourn for him, saying, “This makes me sad, my brother! This makes me sad, my sister!” They will not mourn for him, saying, “Poor, poor lord! Poor, poor majesty!”
JER 22:19 He will be left unburied just like a dead donkey. His body will be dragged off and thrown outside the gates of Jerusalem.’”
JER 22:20 People of Jerusalem, go up to Lebanon and cry out in mourning. Go to the land of Bashan and cry out loudly. Cry out in mourning from the mountains of Moab. For your allies have all been defeated.
JER 22:21 While you were feeling secure I gave you warning. But you said, “I refuse to listen to you.” That is the way you have acted from your earliest history onward. Indeed, you have never paid attention to me.
JER 22:22 My judgment will carry off all your leaders like a storm wind! Your allies will go into captivity. Then you will certainly be disgraced and put to shame because of all the wickedness you have done.
JER 22:23 You may feel as secure as a bird nesting in the cedars of Lebanon. But oh how you will groan when the pains of judgment come on you. They will be like those of a woman giving birth to a baby.
JER 22:24 The Lord says, “As surely as I am the living God, you, Jeconiah, king of Judah, son of Jehoiakim, will not be the earthly representative of my authority. Indeed, I will take that right away from you.
JER 22:25 I will hand you over to those who want to take your life and of whom you are afraid. I will hand you over to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and his Babylonian soldiers.
JER 22:26 I will force you and your mother who gave you birth into exile. You will be exiled to a country where neither of you were born, and you will both die there.
JER 22:27 You will never come back to this land to which you will long to return!”
JER 22:28 This man, Jeconiah, will be like a broken pot someone threw away. He will be like a clay vessel that no one wants. Why will he and his children be forced into exile? Why will they be thrown out into a country they know nothing about?
JER 22:29 O land of Judah, land of Judah, land of Judah! Listen to what the Lord has to say!
JER 22:30 The Lord says, “Enroll this man in the register as though he were childless. Enroll him as a man who will not enjoy success during his lifetime. For none of his sons will succeed in occupying the throne of David or ever succeed in ruling over Judah.”
JER 23:1 The Lord says, “The leaders of my people are sure to be judged. They were supposed to watch over my people like shepherds watch over their sheep. But they are causing my people to be destroyed and scattered.
JER 23:2 So the Lord God of Israel has this to say about the leaders who are ruling over his people: “You have caused my people to be dispersed and driven into exile. You have not taken care of them. So I will punish you for the evil that you have done. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 23:3 Then I myself will regather those of my people who are still alive from all the countries where I have driven them. I will bring them back to their homeland. They will greatly increase in number.
JER 23:4 I will install rulers over them who will care for them. Then they will no longer need to fear or be terrified. None of them will turn up missing. I, the Lord, promise it!
JER 23:5 “I, the Lord, promise that a new time will certainly come when I will raise up for them a righteous branch, a descendant of David. He will rule over them with wisdom and understanding and will do what is just and right in the land.
JER 23:6 Under his rule Judah will enjoy safety and Israel will live in security. This is the name he will go by: ‘The Lord has provided us with justice.’
JER 23:7 “So I, the Lord, say: ‘A new time will certainly come. People now affirm their oaths with “I swear as surely as the Lord lives who delivered the people of Israel out of Egypt.”
JER 23:8 But at that time they will affirm them with “I swear as surely as the Lord lives who delivered the descendants of the former nation of Israel from the land of the north and from all the other lands where he had banished them.” At that time they will live in their own land.’”
JER 23:9 Here is what the Lord says concerning the false prophets: My heart and my mind are deeply disturbed. I tremble all over. I am like a drunk person, like a person who has had too much wine, because of the way the Lord and his holy word are being mistreated.
JER 23:10 For the land is full of people unfaithful to him. They live wicked lives and they misuse their power. So the land is dried up because it is under his curse. The pastures in the wilderness are withered.
JER 23:11 Moreover, the Lord says, “Both the prophets and priests are godless. I have even found them doing evil in my temple!
JER 23:12 So the paths they follow will be dark and slippery. They will stumble and fall headlong. For I will bring disaster on them. A day of reckoning is coming for them.” The Lord affirms it!
JER 23:13 The Lord says, “I saw the prophets of Samaria doing something that was disgusting. They prophesied in the name of the god Baal and led my people Israel astray.
JER 23:14 But I see the prophets of Jerusalem doing something just as shocking. They are unfaithful to me and continually prophesy lies. So they give encouragement to people who are doing evil, with the result that they do not stop their evildoing. I consider all of them as bad as the people of Sodom, and the citizens of Jerusalem as bad as the people of Gomorrah.
JER 23:15 So then I, the Lord who rules over all, have something to say concerning the prophets of Jerusalem: ‘I will make these prophets eat the bitter food of suffering and drink the poison water of judgment. For the prophets of Jerusalem are the reason that ungodliness has spread throughout the land.’”
JER 23:16 The Lord who rules over all says to the people of Jerusalem: “Do not listen to what those prophets are saying to you. They are filling you with false hopes. They are reporting visions of their own imaginations, not something the Lord has given them to say.
JER 23:17 They continually say to those who reject what the Lord has said, ‘Things will go well for you!’ They say to all those who follow the stubborn inclinations of their own hearts, ‘Nothing bad will happen to you!’
JER 23:18 Yet which of them has ever stood in the Lord’s inner circle so they could see and hear what he has to say? Which of them have ever paid attention or listened to what he has said?
JER 23:19 But just watch! The wrath of the Lord will come like a storm! Like a raging storm it will rage down on the heads of those who are wicked.
JER 23:20 The anger of the Lord will not turn back until he has fully carried out his intended purposes. In days to come you people will come to understand this clearly.
JER 23:21 I did not send those prophets. Yet they were in a hurry to give their message. I did not tell them anything. Yet they prophesied anyway.
JER 23:22 But if they had stood in my inner circle, they would have proclaimed my message to my people. They would have caused my people to turn from their wicked ways and stop doing the evil things they are doing.
JER 23:23 Do you people think that I am some local deity and not the transcendent God?” the Lord asks.
JER 23:24 “Do you really think anyone can hide himself where I cannot see him?” the Lord asks. “Do you not know that I am everywhere?” the Lord asks.
JER 23:25 The Lord says, “I have heard what those prophets who are prophesying lies in my name are saying. They are saying, ‘I have had a dream! I have had a dream!’
JER 23:26 Those prophets are just prophesying lies. They are prophesying the delusions of their own minds.
JER 23:27 How long will they go on plotting to make my people forget who I am through the dreams they tell one another? That is just as bad as what their ancestors did when they forgot who I am by worshiping the god Baal.
JER 23:28 Let the prophet who has had a dream go ahead and tell his dream. Let the person who has received my message report that message faithfully. What is like straw cannot compare to what is like grain! I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 23:29 My message is like a fire that purges dross! It is like a hammer that breaks a rock in pieces! I, the Lord, so affirm it!
JER 23:30 So I, the Lord, affirm that I am opposed to those prophets who steal messages from one another that they claim are from me.
JER 23:31 I, the Lord, affirm that I am opposed to those prophets who are using their own tongues to declare, ‘The Lord declares….’
JER 23:32 I, the Lord, affirm that I am opposed to those prophets who dream up lies and report them. They are misleading my people with their reckless lies. I did not send them. I did not commission them. They are not helping these people at all. I, the Lord, affirm it!”
JER 23:33 The Lord said to me, “Jeremiah, when one of these people, or a prophet, or a priest asks you, ‘What burdensome message do you have from the Lord?’ Tell them, ‘You are the burden, and I will cast you away. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 23:34 I will punish any prophet, priest, or other person who says “The Lord’s message is burdensome.” I will punish both that person and his whole family.’”
JER 23:35 So I, Jeremiah, tell you, “Each of you people should say to his friend or his relative, ‘How did the Lord answer? Or what did the Lord say?’
JER 23:36 You must no longer say that the Lord’s message is burdensome. For what is ‘burdensome’ really pertains to what a person himself says. You are misrepresenting the words of our God, the living God, the Lord who rules over all.
JER 23:37 Each of you should merely ask the prophet, ‘What answer did the Lord give you? Or what did the Lord say?’
JER 23:38 But just suppose you continue to say, ‘The message of the Lord is burdensome.’ Here is what the Lord says will happen: ‘I sent word to you that you must not say, “The Lord’s message is burdensome.” But you used the words “The Lord’s message is burdensome” anyway.
JER 23:39 So I will carry you far off and throw you away. I will send both you and the city I gave to you and to your ancestors out of my sight.
JER 23:40 I will bring on you lasting shame and lasting disgrace which will never be forgotten!’”
JER 24:1 The Lord showed me two baskets of figs sitting before his temple. This happened after King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon deported Jehoiakim’s son, King Jeconiah of Judah. He deported him and the leaders of Judah, along with the craftsmen and metal workers, and took them to Babylon.
JER 24:2 One basket had very good-looking figs in it. They looked like those that had ripened early. The other basket had very bad-looking figs in it, so bad they could not be eaten.
JER 24:3 The Lord said to me, “What do you see, Jeremiah?” I answered, “I see figs. The good ones look very good. But the bad ones look very bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten.”
JER 24:4 The Lord said to me,
JER 24:5 “I, the Lord, the God of Israel, say: ‘The exiles whom I sent away from here to the land of Babylon are like those good figs. I consider them to be good.
JER 24:6 I will look after their welfare and will restore them to this land. There I will build them up and will not tear them down. I will plant them firmly in the land and will not uproot them.
JER 24:7 I will give them the desire to acknowledge that I am the Lord. I will be their God and they will be my people. For they will wholeheartedly return to me.’
JER 24:8 “I, the Lord, also solemnly assert: ‘King Zedekiah of Judah, his officials, and the people who remain in Jerusalem or who have gone to live in Egypt are like those bad figs. I consider them to be just like those bad figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten.
JER 24:9 I will bring such disaster on them that all the kingdoms of the earth will be horrified. I will make them an object of reproach, a proverbial example of disaster. I will make them an object of ridicule, an example to be used in curses. That is how they will be remembered wherever I banish them.
JER 24:10 I will bring war, starvation, and disease on them until they are completely destroyed from the land I gave them and their ancestors.’”
JER 25:1 In the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah, the Lord spoke to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah. (That was the same as the first year that Nebuchadnezzar was king of Babylon.)
JER 25:2 So the prophet Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and to all the people who were living in Jerusalem.
JER 25:3 “For the last twenty-three years, from the thirteenth year that Josiah son of Amon was ruling in Judah until now, the Lord has been speaking to me. I told you over and over again what he said. But you would not listen.
JER 25:4 Over and over again the Lord has sent his servants the prophets to you. But you have not listened or paid attention.
JER 25:5 He said through them, ‘Each of you must turn from your wicked ways and stop doing the evil things you are doing. If you do, I will allow you to continue to live here in the land that I gave to you and your ancestors as a lasting possession.
JER 25:6 Do not pay allegiance to other gods and worship and serve them. Do not make me angry by the things that you do. Then I will not cause you any harm.’
JER 25:7 So, now the Lord says, ‘You have not listened to me. But you have made me angry by the things that you have done. Thus you have brought harm on yourselves.’
JER 25:8 “Therefore, the Lord who rules over all says, ‘You have not listened to what I said.
JER 25:9 So I, the Lord, affirm that I will send for all the peoples of the north and my servant, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. I will bring them against this land and its inhabitants and all the nations that surround it. I will utterly destroy this land, its inhabitants, and all the nations that surround it and make them everlasting ruins. I will make them objects of horror and hissing scorn.
JER 25:10 I will put an end to the sounds of joy and gladness, to the glad celebration of brides and grooms in these lands. I will put an end to the sound of people grinding meal. I will put an end to lamps shining in their houses.
JER 25:11 This whole area will become a desolate wasteland. These nations will be subject to the king of Babylon for seventy years.’
JER 25:12 “‘But when the seventy years are over, I will punish the king of Babylon and his nation for their sins. I will make the land of Babylon an everlasting ruin. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 25:13 I will bring on that land everything that I said I would. I will bring on it everything that is written in this book. I will bring on it everything that Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.
JER 25:14 For many nations and great kings will make slaves of the king of Babylon and his nation too. I will repay them for all they have done!’”
JER 25:15 So the Lord, the God of Israel, spoke to me in a vision. “Take this cup from my hand. It is filled with the wine of my wrath. Take it and make the nations to whom I send you drink it.
JER 25:16 When they have drunk it, they will stagger to and fro and act insane. For I will send wars sweeping through them.”
JER 25:17 So I took the cup from the Lord’s hand. I made all the nations to whom he sent me drink the wine of his wrath.
JER 25:18 I made Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, its kings and its officials drink it. I did it so Judah would become a ruin. I did it so Judah, its kings, and its officials would become an object of horror and of hissing scorn, an example used in curses. Such is already becoming the case!
JER 25:19 I made all of these other people drink it: Pharaoh, king of Egypt; his attendants, his officials, his people,
JER 25:20 the foreigners living in Egypt; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the Philistines, the people of Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, the people who had been left alive from Ashdod;
JER 25:21 all the people of Edom, Moab, Ammon;
JER 25:22 all the kings of Tyre, all the kings of the coastlands along the sea;
JER 25:23 the people of Dedan, Tema, Buz, all the desert people who cut their hair short at the temples;
JER 25:24 all the kings of Arabia who live in the desert;
JER 25:25 all the kings of Zimri; all the kings of Elam; all the kings of Media;
JER 25:26 all the kings of the north, whether near or far from one another; and all the other kingdoms which are on the face of the earth. After all of them have drunk the wine of the Lord’s wrath, the king of Babylon must drink it.
JER 25:27 Then the Lord said to me, “Tell them that the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘Drink this cup until you get drunk and vomit. Drink until you fall down and can’t get up. For I will send wars sweeping through you.’
JER 25:28 If they refuse to take the cup from your hand and drink it, tell them that the Lord who rules over all says ‘You most certainly must drink it!
JER 25:29 For take note, I am already beginning to bring disaster on the city that I call my own. So how can you possibly avoid being punished? You will not go unpunished! For I am proclaiming war against all who live on the earth. I, the Lord who rules over all, affirm it!’
JER 25:30 “Then, Jeremiah, make the following prophecy against them: ‘Like a lion about to attack, the Lord will roar from the heights of heaven; from his holy dwelling on high he will roar loudly. He will roar mightily against his land. He will shout in triumph like those stomping juice from the grapes against all those who live on the earth.
JER 25:31 The sounds of battle will resound to the ends of the earth. For the Lord will bring charges against the nations. He will pass judgment on all humankind and will hand the wicked over to be killed in war.’ The Lord so affirms it!
JER 25:32 The Lord who rules over all says, ‘Disaster will soon come on one nation after another. A mighty storm of military destruction is rising up from the distant parts of the earth.’
JER 25:33 Those who have been killed by the Lord at that time will be scattered from one end of the earth to the other. They will not be mourned over, gathered up, or buried. Their dead bodies will lie scattered over the ground like manure.
JER 25:34 Wail and cry out in anguish, you rulers! Roll in the dust, you who shepherd flocks of people! The time for you to be slaughtered has come. You will lie scattered and fallen like broken pieces of fine pottery.
JER 25:35 The leaders will not be able to run away and hide. The shepherds of the flocks will not be able to escape.
JER 25:36 Listen to the cries of anguish of the leaders. Listen to the wails of the shepherds of the flocks. They are wailing because the Lord is about to destroy their lands.
JER 25:37 Their peaceful dwelling places will be laid waste by the fierce anger of the Lord.
JER 25:38 The Lord is like a lion who has left his lair. So their lands will certainly be laid waste by the warfare of the oppressive nation and by the fierce anger of the Lord.”
JER 26:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah at the beginning of the reign of Josiah’s son, King Jehoiakim of Judah.
JER 26:2 The Lord said, “Go stand in the courtyard of the Lord’s temple. Speak out to all the people who are coming from the towns of Judah to worship in the Lord’s temple. Tell them everything I command you to tell them. Do not leave out a single word!
JER 26:3 Maybe they will pay attention and each of them will stop living the evil way they do. If they do that, then I will forgo destroying them as I had intended to do because of the wicked things they have been doing.
JER 26:4 Tell them that the Lord says, ‘You must obey me! You must live according to the way I have instructed you in my laws.
JER 26:5 You must pay attention to the exhortations of my servants the prophets. I have sent them to you over and over again. But you have not paid any attention to them.
JER 26:6 If you do not obey me, then I will do to this temple what I did to Shiloh. And I will make this city an example to be used in curses by people from all the nations on the earth.’”
JER 26:7 The priests, the prophets, and all the people heard Jeremiah say these things in the Lord’s temple.
JER 26:8 Jeremiah had just barely finished saying all the Lord had commanded him to say to all the people. All at once some of the priests, the prophets, and the people grabbed him and shouted, “You deserve to die!
JER 26:9 How dare you claim the Lord’s authority to prophesy such things! How dare you claim his authority to prophesy that this temple will become like Shiloh and that this city will become an uninhabited ruin!” Then all the people crowded around Jeremiah.
JER 26:10 However, some of the officials of Judah heard about what was happening and they rushed up to the Lord’s temple from the royal palace. They set up court at the entrance of the New Gate of the Lord’s temple.
JER 26:11 Then the priests and the prophets made their charges before the officials and all the people. They said, “This man should be condemned to die because he prophesied against this city. You have heard him do so with your own ears.”
JER 26:12 Then Jeremiah made his defense before all the officials and all the people. “The Lord sent me to prophesy everything you have heard me say against this temple and against this city.
JER 26:13 But correct the way you have been living and do what is right. Obey the Lord your God. If you do, the Lord will forgo destroying you as he threatened he would.
JER 26:14 As to my case, I am in your power. Do to me what you deem fair and proper.
JER 26:15 But you should take careful note of this: If you put me to death, you will bring on yourselves and this city and those who live in it the guilt of murdering an innocent man. For the Lord has sent me to speak all this where you can hear it. That is the truth!”
JER 26:16 Then the officials and all the people rendered their verdict to the priests and the prophets. They said, “This man should not be condemned to die. For he has spoken to us under the authority of the Lord our God.”
JER 26:17 Then some of the elders of Judah stepped forward and spoke to all the people gathered there. They said,
JER 26:18 “Micah from Moresheth prophesied during the time Hezekiah was king of Judah. He told all the people of Judah, ‘The Lord who rules over all says, “Zion will become a plowed field. Jerusalem will become a pile of rubble. The temple mount will become a mere wooded ridge.”’
JER 26:19 King Hezekiah and all the people of Judah did not put him to death, did they? Did not Hezekiah show reverence for the Lord and seek the Lord’s favor? Did not the Lord forgo destroying them as he threatened he would? But we are on the verge of bringing great disaster on ourselves.”
JER 26:20 Now there was another man who prophesied as the Lord’s representative against this city and this land just as Jeremiah did. His name was Uriah son of Shemaiah from Kiriath Jearim.
JER 26:21 When the king and all his bodyguards and officials heard what he was prophesying, the king sought to have him executed. But Uriah found out about it and fled to Egypt out of fear.
JER 26:22 However, King Jehoiakim sent some men to Egypt, including Elnathan son of Achbor,
JER 26:23 and they brought Uriah back from there. They took him to King Jehoiakim, who had him executed and had his body thrown into the burial place of the common people.
JER 26:24 However, Ahikam son of Shaphan used his influence to keep Jeremiah from being handed over and executed by the people.
JER 27:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah early in the reign of Josiah’s son, King Zedekiah of Judah.
JER 27:2 The Lord told me, “Make a yoke out of leather straps and wooden crossbars and put it on your neck.
JER 27:3 Use it to send messages to the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, to King Zedekiah of Judah.
JER 27:4 Charge them to give their masters a message from me. Tell them, ‘The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says to give your masters this message.
JER 27:5 “I made the earth and the people and animals on it by my mighty power and great strength, and I give it to whomever I see fit.
JER 27:6 I have at this time placed all these nations of yours under the power of my servant, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. I have even made all the wild animals subject to him.
JER 27:7 All nations must serve him and his son and grandson until the time comes for his own nation to fall. Then many nations and great kings will in turn subjugate Babylon.
JER 27:8 But suppose a nation or a kingdom will not be subject to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. Suppose it will not submit to the yoke of servitude to him. I, the Lord, affirm that I will punish that nation. I will use the king of Babylon to punish it with war, starvation, and disease until I have destroyed it.
JER 27:9 So do not listen to your prophets or to those who claim to predict the future by divination, by dreams, by consulting the dead, or by practicing magic. They keep telling you, ‘You do not need to be subject to the king of Babylon.’
JER 27:10 Do not listen to them, because their prophecies are lies. Listening to them will only cause you to be taken far away from your native land. I will drive you out of your country and you will die in exile.
JER 27:11 Things will go better for the nation that submits to the yoke of servitude to the king of Babylon and is subject to him. I will leave that nation in its native land. Its people can continue to farm it and live in it. I, the Lord, affirm it!”’”
JER 27:12 I told King Zedekiah of Judah the same thing. I said, “Submit to the yoke of servitude to the king of Babylon. Be subject to him and his people. Then you will continue to live.
JER 27:13 There is no reason why you and your people should die in war or from starvation or disease! That’s what the Lord says will happen to any nation that will not be subject to the king of Babylon.
JER 27:14 Do not listen to the prophets who are telling you that you do not need to serve the king of Babylon. For they are prophesying lies to you.
JER 27:15 For I, the Lord, affirm that I did not send them. They are prophesying lies to you. If you listen to them, I will drive you and the prophets who are prophesying lies out of the land and you will all die in exile.”
JER 27:16 I also told the priests and all the people, “The Lord says, ‘Do not listen to what your prophets are saying. They are prophesying to you that the valuable articles taken from the Lord’s temple will be brought back from Babylon very soon. But they are prophesying a lie to you.
JER 27:17 Do not listen to them. Be subject to the king of Babylon. Then you will continue to live. Why should this city be made a pile of rubble?’”
JER 27:18 I also told them, “If they are really prophets and the Lord is speaking to them, let them pray earnestly to the Lord who rules over all. Let them plead with him not to let the valuable articles that are still left in the Lord’s temple, in the royal palace, and in Jerusalem be taken away to Babylon.
JER 27:19 For the Lord who rules over all has already spoken about the two bronze pillars, the large bronze basin called ‘The Sea,’ and the movable bronze stands. He has already spoken about the rest of the valuable articles that are left in this city.
JER 27:20 He has already spoken about these things that King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon did not take away when he carried Jehoiakim’s son King Jeconiah of Judah and the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem away as captives.
JER 27:21 Indeed, the Lord God of Israel who rules over all has already spoken about the valuable articles that are left in the Lord’s temple, in the royal palace of Judah, and in Jerusalem.
JER 27:22 He has said, ‘They will be carried off to Babylon. They will remain there until it is time for me to show consideration for them again. Then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.’ I, the Lord, affirm this!”
JER 28:1 The following events occurred in that same year, early in the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah. To be more precise, it was the fifth month of the fourth year of his reign. The prophet Hananiah son of Azzur, who was from Gibeon, spoke to Jeremiah in the Lord’s temple in the presence of the priests and all the people.
JER 28:2 “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘I will break the yoke of servitude to the king of Babylon.
JER 28:3 Before two years are over, I will bring back to this place everything that King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon took from it and carried away to Babylon.
JER 28:4 I will also bring back to this place Jehoiakim’s son King Jeconiah of Judah and all the exiles who were taken to Babylon.’ Indeed, the Lord affirms, ‘I will break the yoke of servitude to the king of Babylon.’”
JER 28:5 Then the prophet Jeremiah responded to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the Lord’s temple.
JER 28:6 The prophet Jeremiah said, “Amen! May the Lord do all this! May the Lord make your prophecy come true! May he bring back to this place from Babylon all the valuable articles taken from the Lord’s temple and the people who were carried into exile.
JER 28:7 But listen to what I say to you and to all these people.
JER 28:8 From earliest times, the prophets who preceded you and me invariably prophesied war, disaster, and plagues against many countries and great kingdoms.
JER 28:9 So if a prophet prophesied peace and prosperity, it was only known that the Lord truly sent him when what he prophesied came true.”
JER 28:10 The prophet Hananiah then took the yoke off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck and broke it.
JER 28:11 Then he spoke up in the presence of all the people. “The Lord says, ‘In the same way I will break the yoke of servitude of all the nations to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon before two years are over.’” After he heard this, the prophet Jeremiah departed and went on his way.
JER 28:12 But shortly after the prophet Hananiah had broken the yoke off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, the Lord spoke to Jeremiah.
JER 28:13 “Go and tell Hananiah that the Lord says, ‘You have indeed broken the wooden yoke. But you have only succeeded in replacing it with an iron one!
JER 28:14 For the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “I have put an irresistible yoke of servitude on all these nations so they will serve King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. And they will indeed serve him. I have even given him control over the wild animals.”’”
JER 28:15 Then the prophet Jeremiah told the prophet Hananiah, “Listen, Hananiah! The Lord did not send you! You are making these people trust in a lie!
JER 28:16 So the Lord says, ‘I will most assuredly remove you from the face of the earth. You will die this very year because you have counseled rebellion against the Lord.’”
JER 28:17 In the seventh month of that very same year the prophet Hananiah died.
JER 29:1 The prophet Jeremiah sent a letter to the exiles Nebuchadnezzar had carried off from Jerusalem to Babylon. It was addressed to the elders who were left among the exiles, to the priests, to the prophets, and to all the other people who were exiled in Babylon.
JER 29:2 He sent it after King Jeconiah, the queen mother, the palace officials, the leaders of Judah and Jerusalem, the craftsmen, and the metal workers had been exiled from Jerusalem.
JER 29:3 He sent it with Elasah son of Shaphan and Gemariah son of Hilkiah. King Zedekiah of Judah had sent these men to Babylon to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. The letter said:
JER 29:4 “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says to all those he sent into exile to Babylon from Jerusalem,
JER 29:5 ‘Build houses and settle down. Plant gardens and eat what they produce.
JER 29:6 Marry and have sons and daughters. Find wives for your sons and allow your daughters get married so that they too can have sons and daughters. Grow in number; do not dwindle away.
JER 29:7 Work to see that the city where I sent you as exiles enjoys peace and prosperity. Pray to the Lord for it. For as it prospers you will prosper.’
JER 29:8 “For the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘Do not let the prophets or those among you who claim to be able to predict the future by divination deceive you. And do not pay any attention to the dreams that you are encouraging them to dream.
JER 29:9 They are prophesying lies to you and claiming my authority to do so. But I did not send them. I, the Lord, affirm it!’
JER 29:10 “For the Lord says, ‘Only when the seventy years of Babylonian rule are over will I again take up consideration for you. Then I will fulfill my gracious promise to you and restore you to your homeland.
JER 29:11 For I know what I have planned for you,’ says the Lord. ‘I have plans to prosper you, not to harm you. I have plans to give you a future filled with hope.
JER 29:12 When you call out to me and come to me in prayer, I will hear your prayers.
JER 29:13 When you seek me in prayer and worship, you will find me available to you. If you seek me with all your heart and soul,
JER 29:14 I will make myself available to you,’ says the Lord. ‘Then I will reverse your plight and will regather you from all the nations and all the places where I have exiled you,’ says the Lord. ‘I will bring you back to the place from which I exiled you.’
JER 29:15 “You say, ‘The Lord has raised up prophets of good news for us here in Babylon.’
JER 29:16 But just listen to what the Lord has to say about the king who occupies David’s throne and all your fellow countrymen who are still living in this city of Jerusalem and were not carried off into exile with you.
JER 29:17 The Lord who rules over all says, ‘I will bring war, starvation, and disease on them. I will treat them like figs that are so rotten they cannot be eaten.
JER 29:18 I will chase after them with war, starvation, and disease. I will make all the kingdoms of the earth horrified at what happens to them. I will make them examples of those who are cursed, objects of horror, hissing scorn, and ridicule among all the nations where I exile them.
JER 29:19 For they have not paid attention to what I said to them through my servants the prophets whom I sent to them over and over again,’ says the Lord. ‘And you exiles have not paid any attention to them either,’ says the Lord.
JER 29:20 ‘So pay attention to what I, the Lord, have said, all you exiles whom I have sent to Babylon from Jerusalem.’
JER 29:21 “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all also has something to say about Ahab son of Kolaiah and Zedekiah son of Maaseiah, who are prophesying lies to you and claiming my authority to do so. ‘I will hand them over to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and he will execute them before your very eyes.
JER 29:22 And all the exiles of Judah who are in Babylon will use them as examples when they put a curse on anyone. They will say, “May the Lord treat you like Zedekiah and Ahab whom the king of Babylon roasted to death in the fire!”
JER 29:23 This will happen to them because they have done what is shameful in Israel. They have committed adultery with their neighbors’ wives and have spoken lies while claiming my authority. They have spoken words that I did not command them to speak. I know what they have done. I have been a witness to it,’ says the Lord.”
JER 29:24 The Lord told Jeremiah, “Tell Shemaiah the Nehelamite
JER 29:25 that the Lord God of Israel who rules over all has a message for him. Tell him, ‘On your own initiative you sent a letter to the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah and to all the other priests and to all the people in Jerusalem. In your letter you said to Zephaniah,
JER 29:26 “The Lord has made you priest in place of Jehoiada. He has put you in charge in the Lord’s temple of controlling any lunatic who pretends to be a prophet. And it is your duty to put any such person in the stocks with an iron collar around his neck.
JER 29:27 You should have reprimanded Jeremiah from Anathoth who is pretending to be a prophet among you!
JER 29:28 For he has even sent a message to us here in Babylon. He wrote and told us, “You will be there a long time. Build houses and settle down. Plant gardens and eat what they produce.”’”
JER 29:29 Zephaniah the priest read that letter to the prophet Jeremiah.
JER 29:30 Then the Lord spoke to Jeremiah.
JER 29:31 “Send a message to all the exiles in Babylon. Tell them, ‘The Lord has spoken about Shemaiah the Nehelamite. “Shemaiah has spoken to you as a prophet even though I did not send him. He is making you trust in a lie.
JER 29:32 Because he has done this,” the Lord says, “I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite and his whole family. There will not be any of them left to experience the good things that I will do for my people. I, the Lord, affirm it! For he counseled rebellion against the Lord.”’”
JER 30:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah.
JER 30:2 “The Lord God of Israel says, ‘Write everything that I am about to tell you in a scroll.
JER 30:3 For I, the Lord, affirm that the time will come when I will reverse the plight of my people, Israel and Judah,’ says the Lord. ‘I will bring them back to the land I gave their ancestors and they will take possession of it once again.’”
JER 30:4 So here is what the Lord has to say about Israel and Judah.
JER 30:5 Yes, here is what he says: “You hear cries of panic and of terror; there is no peace in sight.
JER 30:6 Ask yourselves this and consider it carefully: Have you ever seen a man give birth to a baby? Why then do I see all these strong men grabbing their stomachs in pain like a woman giving birth? And why do their faces turn so deathly pale?
JER 30:7 Alas, what a terrible time of trouble it is! There has never been any like it. It is a time of trouble for the descendants of Jacob, but some of them will be rescued out of it.
JER 30:8 When the time for them to be rescued comes,” says the Lord who rules over all, “I will rescue you from foreign subjugation. I will deliver you from captivity. Foreigners will then no longer subjugate them.
JER 30:9 But they will be subject to the Lord their God and to the Davidic ruler whom I will raise up as king over them.
JER 30:10 So I, the Lord, tell you not to be afraid, you descendants of Jacob, my servants. Do not be terrified, people of Israel. For I will rescue you and your descendants from a faraway land where you are captives. The descendants of Jacob will return to their land and enjoy peace. They will be secure and no one will terrify them.
JER 30:11 For I, the Lord, affirm that I will be with you and will rescue you. I will completely destroy all the nations where I scattered you. But I will not completely destroy you. I will indeed discipline you, but only in due measure. I will not allow you to go entirely unpunished.”
JER 30:12 Moreover, the Lord says to the people of Zion, “Your injuries are incurable; your wounds are severe.
JER 30:13 There is no one to plead your cause. There are no remedies for your wounds. There is no healing for you.
JER 30:14 All your allies have abandoned you. They no longer have any concern for you. For I have attacked you like an enemy would. I have chastened you cruelly. For your wickedness is so great and your sin is so much.
JER 30:15 Why do you complain about your injuries, that your pain is incurable? I have done all this to you because your wickedness is so great and your sin is so much.
JER 30:16 But all who destroyed you will be destroyed. All your enemies will go into exile. Those who plundered you will be plundered. I will cause those who pillaged you to be pillaged.
JER 30:17 Yes, I will restore you to health. I will heal your wounds. I, the Lord, affirm it! For you have been called an outcast, Zion, whom no one cares for.”
JER 30:18 The Lord says, “I will restore the ruined houses of the descendants of Jacob. I will show compassion on their ruined homes. Every city will be rebuilt on its former ruins. Every fortified dwelling will occupy its traditional site.
JER 30:19 Out of those places you will hear songs of thanksgiving and the sounds of laughter and merriment. I will increase their number and they will not dwindle away. I will bring them honor and they will no longer be despised.
JER 30:20 The descendants of Jacob will enjoy their former privileges. Their community will be reestablished in my favor and I will punish all who try to oppress them.
JER 30:21 One of their own people will be their leader. Their ruler will come from their own number. I will invite him to approach me, and he will do so. For no one would dare approach me on his own. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 30:22 Then you will again be my people and I will be your God.
JER 30:23 Just watch! The wrath of the Lord will come like a storm. Like a raging storm it will rage down on the heads of those who are wicked.
JER 30:24 The anger of the Lord will not turn back until he has fully carried out his intended purposes. In days to come you will come to understand this.
JER 31:1 At that time I will be the God of all the clans of Israel and they will be my people. I, the Lord, affirm it!”
JER 31:2 The Lord says, “The people of Israel who survived death at the hands of the enemy will find favor in the wilderness as they journey to find rest for themselves.
JER 31:3 In a far-off land the Lord will manifest himself to them. He will say to them, ‘I have loved you with an everlasting love. That is why I have continued to be faithful to you.
JER 31:4 I will rebuild you, my dear children Israel, so that you will once again be built up. Once again you will take up the tambourine and join in the happy throng of dancers.
JER 31:5 Once again you will plant vineyards on the hills of Samaria. Those who plant them will once again enjoy their fruit.
JER 31:6 Yes, a time is coming when watchmen will call out on the mountains of Ephraim, “Come! Let us go to Zion to worship the Lord our God!”’”
JER 31:7 Moreover, the Lord says, “Sing for joy for the descendants of Jacob. Utter glad shouts for that foremost of the nations. Make your praises heard. Then say, ‘Lord, rescue your people. Deliver those of Israel who remain alive.’
JER 31:8 Then I will reply, ‘I will bring them back from the land of the north. I will gather them in from the distant parts of the earth. Blind and lame people will come with them, so will pregnant women and women about to give birth. A vast throng of people will come back here.
JER 31:9 They will come back shedding tears of contrition. I will bring them back praying prayers of repentance. I will lead them besides streams of water, along smooth paths where they will never stumble. I will do this because I am Israel’s father; Ephraim is my firstborn son.’”
JER 31:10 Hear what the Lord has to say, O nations. Proclaim it in the faraway lands along the sea. Say, “The one who scattered Israel will regather them. He will watch over his people like a shepherd watches over his flock.”
JER 31:11 For the Lord will rescue the descendants of Jacob. He will secure their release from those who had overpowered them.
JER 31:12 They will come and shout for joy on Mount Zion. They will be radiant with joy over the good things the Lord provides, the grain, the fresh wine, the olive oil, the young sheep and calves he has given to them. They will be like a well-watered garden and will not grow faint or weary any more.
JER 31:13 The Lord says, “At that time young women will dance and be glad. Young men and old men will rejoice. I will turn their grief into gladness. I will give them comfort and joy in place of their sorrow.
JER 31:14 I will provide the priests with abundant provisions. My people will be filled to the full with the good things I provide.”
JER 31:15 The Lord says, “A sound is heard in Ramah, a sound of crying in bitter grief. It is the sound of Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted, because her children are gone.”
JER 31:16 The Lord says to her, “Stop crying! Do not shed any more tears! For your heartfelt repentance will be rewarded. Your children will return from the land of the enemy. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 31:17 Indeed, there is hope for your posterity. Your children will return to their own territory. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 31:18 I have indeed heard the people of Israel say mournfully, ‘We were like a calf untrained to the yoke. You disciplined us and we learned from it. Let us come back to you and we will do so, for you are the Lord our God.
JER 31:19 For after we turned away from you we repented. After we came to our senses we beat our breasts in sorrow. We are ashamed and humiliated because of the disgraceful things we did previously.’
JER 31:20 Indeed, the people of Israel are my dear children. They are the children I take delight in. For even though I must often rebuke them, I still remember them with fondness. So I am deeply moved with pity for them and will surely have compassion on them. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 31:21 I will say, ‘My dear children of Israel, keep in mind the road you took when you were carried off. Mark off in your minds the landmarks. Make a mental note of telltale signs marking the way back. Return, my dear children of Israel. Return to these cities of yours.
JER 31:22 How long will you vacillate, you who were once like an unfaithful daughter? For I, the Lord, promise to bring about something new on the earth, something as unique as a woman protecting a man!’”
JER 31:23 The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “I will restore the people of Judah to their land and to their towns. When I do, they will again say of Jerusalem, ‘May the Lord bless you, you holy mountain, the place where righteousness dwells.’
JER 31:24 The land of Judah will be inhabited by people who live in its towns as well as by farmers and shepherds with their flocks.
JER 31:25 I will fully satisfy the needs of those who are weary and fully refresh the souls of those who are faint.
JER 31:26 Then they will say, ‘Under these conditions I can enjoy sweet sleep when I wake up and look around.’”
JER 31:27 “Indeed, a time is coming,” says the Lord, “when I will cause people and animals to sprout up in the lands of Israel and Judah.
JER 31:28 In the past I saw to it that they were uprooted and torn down, that they were destroyed and demolished. But now I will see to it that they are built up and firmly planted. I, the Lord, affirm it!”
JER 31:29 “When that time comes, people will no longer say, ‘The parents have eaten sour grapes, but the children’s teeth have grown numb.’
JER 31:30 Rather, each person will die for his own sins. The teeth of the person who eats the sour grapes will themselves grow numb.
JER 31:31 “Indeed, a time is coming,” says the Lord, “when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and Judah.
JER 31:32 It will not be like the old covenant that I made with their ancestors when I delivered them from Egypt. For they violated that covenant, even though I was like a faithful husband to them,” says the Lord.
JER 31:33 “But I will make a new covenant with the whole nation of Israel after I plant them back in the land,” says the Lord. “I will put my law within them and write it on their hearts and minds. I will be their God and they will be my people.
JER 31:34 “People will no longer need to teach their neighbors and relatives to know me. For all of them, from the least important to the most important, will know me,” says the Lord. “For I will forgive their sin and will no longer call to mind the wrong they have done.”
JER 31:35 The Lord has made a promise to Israel. He promises it as the one who fixed the sun to give light by day and the moon and stars to give light by night. He promises it as the one who stirs up the sea so that its waves roll. He promises it as the one who is known as the Lord who rules over all.
JER 31:36 The Lord affirms, “The descendants of Israel will not cease forever to be a nation in my sight. That could only happen if the fixed ordering of the heavenly lights were to cease to operate before me.”
JER 31:37 The Lord says, “I will not reject all the descendants of Israel because of all that they have done. That could only happen if the heavens above could be measured or the foundations of the earth below could all be explored,” says the Lord.
JER 31:38 “Indeed a time is coming,” says the Lord, “when the city of Jerusalem will be rebuilt as my special city. It will be built from the Tower of Hananel westward to the Corner Gate.
JER 31:39 The boundary line will extend beyond that, straight west from there to the Hill of Gareb and then turn southward to Goah.
JER 31:40 The whole valley where dead bodies and sacrificial ashes are thrown and all the terraced fields out to the Kidron Valley on the east as far north as the Horse Gate will be included within this city that is sacred to the Lord. The city will never again be torn down or destroyed.”
JER 32:1 In the tenth year that Zedekiah was ruling over Judah the Lord spoke to Jeremiah. That was the same as the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.
JER 32:2 Now at that time, the armies of the king of Babylon were besieging Jerusalem. The prophet Jeremiah was confined in the courtyard of the guardhouse attached to the royal palace of Judah.
JER 32:3 For King Zedekiah had confined Jeremiah there after he had reproved him for prophesying as he did. He had asked Jeremiah, “Why do you keep prophesying these things? Why do you keep saying that the Lord says, ‘I will hand this city over to the king of Babylon? I will let him capture it.
JER 32:4 King Zedekiah of Judah will not escape from the Babylonians. He will certainly be handed over to the king of Babylon. He must answer personally to the king of Babylon and confront him face to face.
JER 32:5 Zedekiah will be carried off to Babylon and will remain there until I have fully dealt with him. I, the Lord, affirm it! Even if you continue to fight against the Babylonians, you cannot win.’”
JER 32:6 So now, Jeremiah said, “The Lord told me,
JER 32:7 ‘Hanamel, the son of your uncle Shallum, will come to you soon. He will say to you, “Buy my field at Anathoth because you are entitled as my closest relative to buy it.”’
JER 32:8 Now it happened just as the Lord had said! My cousin Hanamel came to me in the courtyard of the guardhouse. He said to me, ‘Buy my field which is at Anathoth in the territory of the tribe of Benjamin. Buy it for yourself since you are entitled as my closest relative to take possession of it for yourself.’ When this happened, I recognized that the Lord had indeed spoken to me.
JER 32:9 So I bought the field at Anathoth from my cousin Hanamel. I weighed out seven ounces of silver and gave it to him to pay for it.
JER 32:10 I signed the deed of purchase, sealed it, and had some men serve as witnesses to the purchase. I weighed out the silver for him on a scale.
JER 32:11 There were two copies of the deed of purchase. One was sealed and contained the order of transfer and the conditions of purchase. The other was left unsealed.
JER 32:12 I took both copies of the deed of purchase and gave them to Baruch son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah. I gave them to him in the presence of my cousin Hanamel, the witnesses who had signed the deed of purchase, and all the Judeans who were housed in the courtyard of the guardhouse.
JER 32:13 In the presence of all these people I instructed Baruch,
JER 32:14 ‘The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “Take these documents, both the sealed copy of the deed of purchase and the unsealed copy. Put them in a clay jar so that they may be preserved for a long time to come.”’
JER 32:15 For the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “Houses, fields, and vineyards will again be bought in this land.”’
JER 32:16 “After I had given the copies of the deed of purchase to Baruch son of Neriah, I prayed to the Lord,
JER 32:17 ‘Oh, Lord God, you did indeed make heaven and earth by your mighty power and great strength. Nothing is too hard for you!
JER 32:18 You show unfailing love to thousands. But you also punish children for the sins of their parents. You are the great and powerful God who is known as the Lord who rules over all.
JER 32:19 You plan great things and you do mighty deeds. You see everything people do. You reward each of them for the way they live and for the things they do.
JER 32:20 You did miracles and amazing deeds in the land of Egypt which have had lasting effect. By this means you gained both in Israel and among humankind a renown that lasts to this day.
JER 32:21 You used your mighty power and your great strength to perform miracles and amazing deeds and to bring great terror on the Egyptians. By this means you brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt.
JER 32:22 You kept the promise that you swore on oath to their ancestors. You gave them a land flowing with milk and honey.
JER 32:23 But when they came in and took possession of it, they did not obey you or live as you had instructed them. They did not do anything that you commanded them to do. So you brought all this disaster on them.
JER 32:24 Even now siege ramps have been built up around the city in order to capture it. War, starvation, and disease are sure to make the city fall into the hands of the Babylonians who are attacking it. Lord, you threatened that this would happen. Now you can see that it is already taking place.
JER 32:25 The city is sure to fall into the hands of the Babylonians. Yet, in spite of this, you, Lord God, have said to me, “Buy that field with silver and have the transaction legally witnessed.”’”
JER 32:26 The Lord answered Jeremiah.
JER 32:27 “I am the Lord, the God of all humankind. There is, indeed, nothing too difficult for me.
JER 32:28 Therefore I, the Lord, say: ‘I will indeed hand this city over to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the Babylonian army. They will capture it.
JER 32:29 The Babylonian soldiers that are attacking this city will break into it and set it on fire. They will burn it down along with the houses where people have made me angry by offering sacrifices to the god Baal and by pouring out drink offerings to other gods on their rooftops.
JER 32:30 This will happen because the people of Israel and Judah have repeatedly done what displeases me from their earliest history until now and because they have repeatedly made me angry by the things they have done. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 32:31 This will happen because the people of this city have aroused my anger and my wrath since the time they built it until now. They have made me so angry that I am determined to remove it from my sight.
JER 32:32 I am determined to do so because the people of Israel and Judah have made me angry with all their wickedness – they, their kings, their officials, their priests, their prophets, and especially the people of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem have done this wickedness.
JER 32:33 They have turned away from me instead of turning to me. I tried over and over again to instruct them, but they did not listen and respond to correction.
JER 32:34 They set up their disgusting idols in the temple which I have claimed for my own and defiled it.
JER 32:35 They built places of worship for the god Baal in the Valley of Ben Hinnom so that they could sacrifice their sons and daughters to the god Molech. Such a disgusting practice was not something I commanded them to do! It never even entered my mind to command them to do such a thing! So Judah is certainly liable for punishment.’
JER 32:36 “You and your people are right in saying, ‘War, starvation, and disease are sure to make this city fall into the hands of the king of Babylon.’ But now I, the Lord God of Israel, have something further to say about this city:
JER 32:37 ‘I will certainly regather my people from all the countries where I will have exiled them in my anger, fury, and great wrath. I will bring them back to this place and allow them to live here in safety.
JER 32:38 They will be my people, and I will be their God.
JER 32:39 I will give them a single-minded purpose to live in a way that always shows respect for me. They will want to do that for their own good and the good of the children who descend from them.
JER 32:40 I will make a lasting covenant with them that I will never stop doing good to them. I will fill their hearts and minds with respect for me so that they will never again turn away from me.
JER 32:41 I will take delight in doing good to them. I will faithfully and wholeheartedly plant them firmly in the land.’
JER 32:42 “For I, the Lord, say: ‘I will surely bring on these people all the good fortune that I am hereby promising them. I will be just as sure to do that as I have been in bringing all this great disaster on them.
JER 32:43 You and your people are saying that this land will become desolate, uninhabited by either people or animals. You are saying that it will be handed over to the Babylonians. But fields will again be bought in this land.
JER 32:44 Fields will again be bought with silver, and deeds of purchase signed, sealed, and witnessed. This will happen in the territory of Benjamin, the villages surrounding Jerusalem, the towns in Judah, the southern hill country, the western foothills, and southern Judah. For I will restore them to their land. I, the Lord, affirm it!’”
JER 33:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah a second time while he was still confined in the courtyard of the guardhouse.
JER 33:2 “I, the Lord, do these things. I, the Lord, form the plan to bring them about. I am known as the Lord. I say to you,
JER 33:3 ‘Call on me in prayer and I will answer you. I will show you great and mysterious things which you still do not know about.’
JER 33:4 For I, the Lord God of Israel, have something more to say about the houses in this city and the royal buildings which have been torn down for defenses against the siege ramps and military incursions of the Babylonians:
JER 33:5 ‘The defenders of the city will go out and fight with the Babylonians. But they will only fill those houses and buildings with the dead bodies of the people that I will kill in my anger and my wrath. That will happen because I have decided to turn my back on this city on account of the wicked things they have done.
JER 33:6 But I will most surely heal the wounds of this city and restore it and its people to health. I will show them abundant peace and security.
JER 33:7 I will restore Judah and Israel and will rebuild them as they were in days of old.
JER 33:8 I will purify them from all the sin that they committed against me. I will forgive all their sins which they committed in rebelling against me.
JER 33:9 All the nations will hear about all the good things which I will do to them. This city will bring me fame, honor, and praise before them for the joy that I bring it. The nations will tremble in awe at all the peace and prosperity that I will provide for it.’
JER 33:10 “I, the Lord, say: ‘You and your people are saying about this place, “It lies in ruins. There are no people or animals in it.” That is true. The towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem will soon be desolate, uninhabited either by people or by animals. But happy sounds will again be heard in these places.
JER 33:11 Once again there will be sounds of joy and gladness and the glad celebrations of brides and grooms. Once again people will bring their thank offerings to the temple of the Lord and will say, “Give thanks to the Lord who rules over all. For the Lord is good and his unfailing love lasts forever.” For I, the Lord, affirm that I will restore the land to what it was in days of old.’
JER 33:12 “I, the Lord who rules over all, say: ‘This place will indeed lie in ruins. There will be no people or animals in it. But there will again be in it and in its towns sheepfolds where shepherds can rest their sheep.
JER 33:13 I, the Lord, say that shepherds will once again count their sheep as they pass into the fold. They will do this in all the towns in the southern hill country, the western foothills, the southern hill country, the territory of Benjamin, the villages surrounding Jerusalem, and the towns of Judah.’
JER 33:14 “I, the Lord, affirm: ‘The time will certainly come when I will fulfill my gracious promise concerning the nations of Israel and Judah.
JER 33:15 In those days and at that time I will raise up for them a righteous descendant of David. “‘He will do what is just and right in the land.
JER 33:16 Under his rule Judah will enjoy safety and Jerusalem will live in security. At that time Jerusalem will be called “The Lord has provided us with justice.”
JER 33:17 For I, the Lord, promise: “David will never lack a successor to occupy the throne over the nation of Israel.
JER 33:18 Nor will the Levitical priests ever lack someone to stand before me and continually offer up burnt offerings, sacrifice cereal offerings, and offer the other sacrifices.”’”
JER 33:19 The Lord spoke further to Jeremiah.
JER 33:20 “I, Lord, make the following promise: ‘I have made a covenant with the day and with the night that they will always come at their proper times. Only if you people could break that covenant
JER 33:21 could my covenant with my servant David and my covenant with the Levites ever be broken. So David will by all means always have a descendant to occupy his throne as king and the Levites will by all means always have priests who will minister before me.
JER 33:22 I will make the children who follow one another in the line of my servant David very numerous. I will also make the Levites who minister before me very numerous. I will make them all as numerous as the stars in the sky and as the sands which are on the seashore.’”
JER 33:23 The Lord spoke still further to Jeremiah.
JER 33:24 “You have surely noticed what these people are saying, haven’t you? They are saying, ‘The Lord has rejected the two families of Israel and Judah that he chose.’ So they have little regard that my people will ever again be a nation.
JER 33:25 But I, the Lord, make the following promise: I have made a covenant governing the coming of day and night. I have established the fixed laws governing heaven and earth.
JER 33:26 Just as surely as I have done this, so surely will I never reject the descendants of Jacob. Nor will I ever refuse to choose one of my servant David’s descendants to rule over the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Indeed, I will restore them and show mercy to them.”
JER 34:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah while King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon was attacking Jerusalem and the towns around it with a large army. This army consisted of troops from his own army and from the kingdoms and peoples of the lands under his dominion.
JER 34:2 The Lord God of Israel told Jeremiah to go and give King Zedekiah of Judah a message. He told Jeremiah to tell him, “The Lord says, ‘I am going to hand this city over to the king of Babylon and he will burn it down.
JER 34:3 You yourself will not escape his clutches, but will certainly be captured and handed over to him. You must confront the king of Babylon face to face and answer to him personally. Then you must go to Babylon.
JER 34:4 However, listen to what I, the Lord, promise you, King Zedekiah of Judah. I, the Lord, promise that you will not die in battle or be executed.
JER 34:5 You will die a peaceful death. They will burn incense at your burial just as they did at the burial of your ancestors, the former kings who preceded you. They will mourn for you, saying, “Poor, poor master!” Indeed, you have my own word on this. I, the Lord, affirm it!’”
JER 34:6 The prophet Jeremiah told all this to King Zedekiah of Judah in Jerusalem.
JER 34:7 He did this while the army of the king of Babylon was attacking Jerusalem and the cities of Lachish and Azekah. He was attacking these cities because they were the only fortified cities of Judah which were still holding out.
JER 34:8 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah after King Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to grant their slaves their freedom.
JER 34:9 Everyone was supposed to free their male and female Hebrew slaves. No one was supposed to keep a fellow Judean enslaved.
JER 34:10 All the people and their leaders had agreed to this. They had agreed to free their male and female slaves and not keep them enslaved any longer. They originally complied with the covenant and freed them.
JER 34:11 But later they had changed their minds. They had taken back their male and female slaves that they had freed and forced them to be slaves again.
JER 34:12 That was when the Lord spoke to Jeremiah,
JER 34:13 “The Lord God of Israel has a message for you. ‘I made a covenant with your ancestors when I brought them out of Egypt where they had been slaves. It stipulated,
JER 34:14 “Every seven years each of you must free any fellow Hebrews who have sold themselves to you. After they have served you for six years, you shall set them free.” But your ancestors did not obey me or pay any attention to me.
JER 34:15 Recently, however, you yourselves showed a change of heart and did what is pleasing to me. You granted your fellow countrymen their freedom and you made a covenant to that effect in my presence in the house that I have claimed for my own.
JER 34:16 But then you turned right around and showed that you did not honor me. Each of you took back your male and female slaves whom you had freed as they desired, and you forced them to be your slaves again.
JER 34:17 So I, the Lord, say: “You have not really obeyed me and granted freedom to your neighbor and fellow countryman. Therefore, I will grant you freedom, the freedom to die in war, or by starvation or disease. I, the Lord, affirm it! I will make all the kingdoms of the earth horrified at what happens to you.
JER 34:18 I will punish those people who have violated their covenant with me. I will make them like the calf they cut in two and passed between its pieces. I will do so because they did not keep the terms of the covenant they made in my presence.
JER 34:19 I will punish the leaders of Judah and Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the other people of the land who passed between the pieces of the calf.
JER 34:20 I will hand them over to their enemies who want to kill them. Their dead bodies will become food for the birds and the wild animals.
JER 34:21 I will also hand King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials over to their enemies who want to kill them. I will hand them over to the army of the king of Babylon, even though they have temporarily withdrawn from attacking you.
JER 34:22 For I, the Lord, affirm that I will soon give the order and bring them back to this city. They will fight against it and capture it and burn it down. I will also make the towns of Judah desolate so that there will be no one living in them.”’”
JER 35:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah when Jehoiakim son of Josiah was ruling over Judah.
JER 35:2 “Go to the Rechabite community. Invite them to come into one of the side rooms of the Lord’s temple and offer them some wine to drink.”
JER 35:3 So I went and got Jaazaniah son of Jeremiah the grandson of Habazziniah, his brothers, all his sons, and all the rest of the Rechabite community.
JER 35:4 I took them to the Lord’s temple. I took them into the room where the disciples of the prophet Hanan son of Igdaliah stayed. That room was next to the one where the temple officers stayed and above the room where Maaseiah son of Shallum, one of the doorkeepers of the temple, stayed.
JER 35:5 Then I set cups and pitchers full of wine in front of the members of the Rechabite community and said to them, “Have some wine.”
JER 35:6 But they answered, “We do not drink wine because our ancestor Jonadab son of Rechab commanded us not to. He told us, ‘You and your children must never drink wine.
JER 35:7 Do not build houses. Do not plant crops. Do not plant a vineyard or own one. Live in tents all your lives. If you do these things you will live a long time in the land that you wander about on.’
JER 35:8 We and our wives and our sons and daughters have obeyed everything our ancestor Jonadab commanded us. We have never drunk wine.
JER 35:9 We have not built any houses to live in. We do not own any vineyards, fields, or crops.
JER 35:10 We have lived in tents. We have obeyed our ancestor Jonadab and done exactly as he commanded us.
JER 35:11 But when King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon invaded the land we said, ‘Let’s get up and go to Jerusalem to get away from the Babylonian and Aramean armies.’ That is why we are staying here in Jerusalem.”
JER 35:12 Then the Lord spoke to Jeremiah.
JER 35:13 The Lord God of Israel who rules over all told him, “Go and speak to the people of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem. Tell them, ‘I, the Lord, say: “You must learn a lesson from this about obeying what I say!
JER 35:14 Jonadab son of Rechab ordered his descendants not to drink wine. His orders have been carried out. To this day his descendants have drunk no wine because they have obeyed what their ancestor commanded them. But I have spoken to you over and over again, but you have not obeyed me!
JER 35:15 I sent all my servants the prophets to warn you over and over again. They said, “Every one of you, stop doing the evil things you have been doing and do what is right. Do not pay allegiance to other gods and worship them. Then you can continue to live in this land that I gave to you and your ancestors.” But you did not pay any attention or listen to me.
JER 35:16 Yes, the descendants of Jonadab son of Rechab have carried out the orders that their ancestor gave them. But you people have not obeyed me!
JER 35:17 So I, the Lord, the God who rules over all, the God of Israel, say: “I will soon bring on Judah and all the citizens of Jerusalem all the disaster that I threatened to bring on them. I will do this because I spoke to them but they did not listen. I called out to them but they did not answer.”’”
JER 35:18 Then Jeremiah spoke to the Rechabite community, “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘You have obeyed the orders of your ancestor Jonadab. You have followed all his instructions. You have done exactly as he commanded you.’
JER 35:19 So the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘Jonadab son of Rechab will never lack a male descendant to serve me.’”
JER 36:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah in the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was ruling over Judah.
JER 36:2 “Get a scroll. Write on it everything I have told you to say about Israel, Judah, and all the other nations since I began to speak to you in the reign of Josiah until now.
JER 36:3 Perhaps when the people of Judah hear about all the disaster I intend to bring on them, they will all stop doing the evil things they have been doing. If they do, I will forgive their sins and the wicked things they have done.”
JER 36:4 So Jeremiah summoned Baruch son of Neriah. Then Jeremiah dictated to Baruch everything the Lord had told him to say and Baruch wrote it all down in a scroll.
JER 36:5 Then Jeremiah told Baruch, “I am no longer allowed to go into the Lord’s temple.
JER 36:6 So you go there the next time all the people of Judah come in from their towns to fast in the Lord’s temple. Read out loud where all of them can hear you what I told you the Lord said, which you wrote in the scroll.
JER 36:7 Perhaps then they will ask the Lord for mercy and will all stop doing the evil things they have been doing. For the Lord has threatened to bring great anger and wrath against these people.”
JER 36:8 So Baruch son of Neriah did exactly what the prophet Jeremiah had told him to do. He read what the Lord had said from the scroll in the temple of the Lord.
JER 36:9 All the people living in Jerusalem and all the people who came into Jerusalem from the towns of Judah came to observe a fast before the Lord. The fast took place in the ninth month of the fifth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was ruling over Judah.
JER 36:10 At that time Baruch went into the temple of the Lord. He stood in the entrance of the room of Gemariah the son of Shaphan who had been the royal secretary. That room was in the upper court near the entrance of the New Gate. There, where all the people could hear him, he read from the scroll what Jeremiah had said.
JER 36:11 Micaiah, who was the son of Gemariah and the grandson of Shaphan, heard Baruch read from the scroll everything the Lord had said.
JER 36:12 He went down to the chamber of the royal secretary in the king’s palace and found all the court officials in session there. Elishama the royal secretary, Delaiah son of Shemaiah, Elnathan son of Achbor, Gemariah son of Shaphan, Zedekiah son of Hananiah, and all the other officials were seated there.
JER 36:13 Micaiah told them everything he had heard Baruch read from the scroll in the hearing of the people.
JER 36:14 All the officials sent Jehudi, who was the son of Nethaniah and the grandson of Cushi, to Baruch. They ordered him to tell Baruch, “Come here and bring with you the scroll you read in the hearing of the people.” So Baruch son of Neriah went to them, carrying the scroll in his hand.
JER 36:15 They said to him, “Please sit down and read it to us.” So Baruch sat down and read it to them.
JER 36:16 When they had heard it all, they expressed their alarm to one another. Then they said to Baruch, “We must certainly give the king a report about everything you have read!”
JER 36:17 Then they asked Baruch, “How did you come to write all these words? Do they actually come from Jeremiah’s mouth?”
JER 36:18 Baruch answered, “Yes, they came from his own mouth. He dictated all these words to me and I wrote them down in ink on this scroll.”
JER 36:19 Then the officials said to Baruch, “You and Jeremiah must go and hide. You must not let anyone know where you are.”
JER 36:20 The officials put the scroll in the room of Elishama, the royal secretary, for safekeeping. Then they went to the court and reported everything to the king.
JER 36:21 The king sent Jehudi to get the scroll. He went and got it from the room of Elishama, the royal secretary. Then he himself read it to the king and all the officials who were standing around him.
JER 36:22 Since it was the ninth month of the year, the king was sitting in his winter quarters. A fire was burning in the firepot in front of him.
JER 36:23 As soon as Jehudi had read three or four columns of the scroll, the king would cut them off with a penknife and throw them on the fire in the firepot. He kept doing so until the whole scroll was burned up in the fire.
JER 36:24 Neither he nor any of his attendants showed any alarm when they heard all that had been read. Nor did they tear their clothes to show any grief or sorrow.
JER 36:25 The king did not even listen to Elnathan, Delaiah, and Gemariah, who had urged him not to burn the scroll.
JER 36:26 He also ordered Jerahmeel, who was one of the royal princes, Seraiah son of Azriel, and Shelemiah son of Abdeel to arrest the scribe Baruch and the prophet Jeremiah. However, the Lord hid them.
JER 36:27 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah after Jehoiakim had burned the scroll containing what Jeremiah had spoken and Baruch had written down.
JER 36:28 “Get another scroll and write on it everything that was written on the original scroll that King Jehoiakim of Judah burned.
JER 36:29 Tell King Jehoiakim of Judah, ‘The Lord says, “You burned the scroll. You asked Jeremiah, ‘How dare you write in this scroll that the king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land and wipe out all the people and animals on it?’”
JER 36:30 So the Lord says concerning King Jehoiakim of Judah, “None of his line will occupy the throne of David. His dead body will be thrown out to be exposed to scorching heat by day and frost by night.
JER 36:31 I will punish him and his descendants and the officials who serve him for the wicked things they have done. I will bring on them, the citizens of Jerusalem, and the people of Judah all the disaster that I threatened to do to them. I will punish them because I threatened them but they still paid no heed.”’”
JER 36:32 Then Jeremiah got another scroll and gave it to the scribe Baruch son of Neriah. As Jeremiah dictated, Baruch wrote on this scroll everything that had been on the scroll that King Jehoiakim of Judah burned in the fire. They also added on this scroll several other messages of the same kind.
JER 37:1 Zedekiah son of Josiah succeeded Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim as king. He was elevated to the throne of the land of Judah by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon.
JER 37:2 Neither he nor the officials who served him nor the people of Judah paid any attention to what the Lord said through the prophet Jeremiah.
JER 37:3 King Zedekiah sent Jehucal son of Shelemiah and the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah to the prophet Jeremiah. He told them to say, “Please pray to the Lord our God on our behalf.”
JER 37:4 (Now Jeremiah had not yet been put in prison. So he was still free to come and go among the people as he pleased.
JER 37:5 At that time the Babylonian forces had temporarily given up their siege against Jerusalem. They had had it under siege, but withdrew when they heard that the army of Pharaoh had set out from Egypt. )
JER 37:6 The Lord gave the prophet Jeremiah a message for them. He told him to tell them,
JER 37:7 “The Lord God of Israel says, ‘Give a message to the king of Judah who sent you to ask me to help him. Tell him, “The army of Pharaoh that was on its way to help you will go back home to Egypt.
JER 37:8 Then the Babylonian forces will return. They will attack the city and will capture it and burn it down.
JER 37:9 Moreover, I, the Lord, warn you not to deceive yourselves into thinking that the Babylonian forces will go away and leave you alone. For they will not go away.
JER 37:10 For even if you were to defeat all the Babylonian forces fighting against you so badly that only wounded men were left lying in their tents, they would get up and burn this city down.”’”
JER 37:11 The following events also occurred while the Babylonian forces had temporarily withdrawn from Jerusalem because the army of Pharaoh was coming.
JER 37:12 Jeremiah started to leave Jerusalem to go to the territory of Benjamin. He wanted to make sure he got his share of the property that was being divided up among his family there.
JER 37:13 But he only got as far as the Benjamin Gate. There an officer in charge of the guards named Irijah, who was the son of Shelemiah and the grandson of Hananiah, stopped him. He seized Jeremiah and said, “You are deserting to the Babylonians!”
JER 37:14 Jeremiah answered, “That’s a lie! I am not deserting to the Babylonians.” But Irijah would not listen to him. Irijah put Jeremiah under arrest and took him to the officials.
JER 37:15 The officials were very angry at Jeremiah. They had him flogged and put in prison in the house of Jonathan, the royal secretary, which they had converted into a place for confining prisoners.
JER 37:16 So Jeremiah was put in prison in a cell in the dungeon in Jonathan’s house. He was kept there for a long time.
JER 37:17 Then King Zedekiah had him brought to the palace. There he questioned him privately and asked him, “Is there any message from the Lord?” Jeremiah answered, “Yes, there is.” Then he announced, “You will be handed over to the king of Babylon.”
JER 37:18 Then Jeremiah asked King Zedekiah, “What crime have I committed against you, or the officials who serve you, or the people of Judah? What have I done to make you people throw me into prison?
JER 37:19 Where now are the prophets who prophesied to you that the king of Babylon would not attack you or this land?
JER 37:20 But now please listen, your royal Majesty, and grant my plea for mercy. Do not send me back to the house of Jonathan, the royal secretary. If you do, I will die there.”
JER 37:21 Then King Zedekiah ordered that Jeremiah be committed to the courtyard of the guardhouse. He also ordered that a loaf of bread be given to him every day from the baker’s street until all the bread in the city was gone. So Jeremiah was kept in the courtyard of the guardhouse.
JER 38:1 Now Shephatiah son of Mattan, Gedaliah son of Pashhur, Jehucal son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur son of Malkijah had heard the things that Jeremiah had been telling the people. They had heard him say,
JER 38:2 “The Lord says, ‘Those who stay in this city will die in battle or of starvation or disease. Those who leave the city and surrender to the Babylonians will live. They will escape with their lives.’”
JER 38:3 They had also heard him say, “The Lord says, ‘This city will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon. They will capture it.’”
JER 38:4 So these officials said to the king, “This man must be put to death. For he is demoralizing the soldiers who are left in the city as well as all the other people there by these things he is saying. This man is not seeking to help these people but is trying to harm them.”
JER 38:5 King Zedekiah said to them, “Very well, you can do what you want with him. For I cannot do anything to stop you.”
JER 38:6 So the officials took Jeremiah and put him in the cistern of Malkijah, one of the royal princes, that was in the courtyard of the guardhouse. There was no water in the cistern, only mud. So when they lowered Jeremiah into the cistern with ropes he sank in the mud.
JER 38:7 An Ethiopian, Ebed Melech, a court official in the royal palace, heard that Jeremiah had been put in the cistern. While the king was holding court at the Benjamin Gate,
JER 38:8 Ebed Melech departed the palace and went to speak to the king. He said to him,
JER 38:9 “Your royal Majesty, those men have been very wicked in all that they have done to the prophet Jeremiah. They have thrown him into a cistern and he is sure to die of starvation there because there is no food left in the city.
JER 38:10 Then the king gave Ebed Melech the Ethiopian the following order: “Take thirty men with you from here and go pull the prophet Jeremiah out of the cistern before he dies.”
JER 38:11 So Ebed Melech took the men with him and went to a room under the treasure room in the palace. He got some worn-out clothes and old rags from there and let them down by ropes to Jeremiah in the cistern.
JER 38:12 Ebed Melech called down to Jeremiah, “Put these rags and worn-out clothes under your armpits to pad the ropes. Jeremiah did as Ebed Melech instructed.
JER 38:13 So they pulled Jeremiah up from the cistern with ropes. Jeremiah, however, still remained confined to the courtyard of the guardhouse.
JER 38:14 Some time later Zedekiah sent and had Jeremiah brought to him at the third entrance of the Lord’s temple. The king said to Jeremiah, “I would like to ask you a question. Do not hide anything from me when you answer.”
JER 38:15 Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, “If I answer you, you will certainly kill me. If I give you advice, you will not listen to me.”
JER 38:16 So King Zedekiah made a secret promise to Jeremiah and sealed it with an oath. He promised, “As surely as the Lord lives who has given us life and breath, I promise you this: I will not kill you or hand you over to those men who want to kill you.”
JER 38:17 Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, “The Lord, the God who rules over all, the God of Israel, says, ‘You must surrender to the officers of the king of Babylon. If you do, your life will be spared and this city will not be burned down. Indeed, you and your whole family will be spared.
JER 38:18 But if you do not surrender to the officers of the king of Babylon, this city will be handed over to the Babylonians and they will burn it down. You yourself will not escape from them.’”
JER 38:19 Then King Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, “I am afraid of the Judeans who have deserted to the Babylonians. The Babylonians might hand me over to them and they will torture me.”
JER 38:20 Then Jeremiah answered, “You will not be handed over to them. Please obey the Lord by doing what I have been telling you. Then all will go well with you and your life will be spared.
JER 38:21 But if you refuse to surrender, the Lord has shown me a vision of what will happen. Here is what I saw:
JER 38:22 All the women who are left in the royal palace of Judah will be led out to the officers of the king of Babylon. They will taunt you saying, ‘Your trusted friends misled you; they have gotten the best of you. Now that your feet are stuck in the mud, they have turned their backs on you.’
JER 38:23 “All your wives and your children will be turned over to the Babylonians. You yourself will not escape from them but will be captured by the king of Babylon. This city will be burned down.”
JER 38:24 Then Zedekiah told Jeremiah, “Do not let anyone know about the conversation we have had. If you do, you will die.
JER 38:25 The officials may hear that I have talked with you. They may come to you and say, ‘Tell us what you said to the king and what the king said to you. Do not hide anything from us. If you do, we will kill you.’
JER 38:26 If they do this, tell them, ‘I was pleading with the king not to send me back to die in the dungeon of Jonathan’s house.’”
JER 38:27 All the officials did indeed come and question Jeremiah. He told them exactly what the king had instructed him to say. They stopped questioning him any further because no one had actually heard their conversation.
JER 38:28 So Jeremiah remained confined in the courtyard of the guardhouse until the day Jerusalem was captured. The following events occurred when Jerusalem was captured.
JER 39:1 King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came against Jerusalem with his whole army and laid siege to it. The siege began in the tenth month of the ninth year that Zedekiah ruled over Judah.
JER 39:2 It lasted until the ninth day of the fourth month of Zedekiah’s eleventh year. On that day they broke through the city walls.
JER 39:3 Then Nergal-Sharezer of Samgar, Nebo-Sarsekim, who was a chief officer, Nergal-Sharezer, who was a high official, and all the other officers of the king of Babylon came and set up quarters in the Middle Gate.
JER 39:4 When King Zedekiah of Judah and all his soldiers saw them, they tried to escape. They departed from the city during the night. They took a path through the king’s garden and passed out through the gate between the two walls. Then they headed for the Jordan Valley.
JER 39:5 But the Babylonian army chased after them. They caught up with Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho and captured him. They took him to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon at Riblah in the territory of Hamath and Nebuchadnezzar passed sentence on him there.
JER 39:6 There at Riblah the king of Babylon had Zedekiah’s sons put to death while Zedekiah was forced to watch. The king of Babylon also had all the nobles of Judah put to death.
JER 39:7 Then he had Zedekiah’s eyes put out and had him bound in chains to be led off to Babylon.
JER 39:8 The Babylonians burned down the royal palace, the temple of the Lord, and the people’s homes, and they tore down the wall of Jerusalem.
JER 39:9 Then Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, took captive the rest of the people who were left in the city. He carried them off to Babylon along with the people who had deserted to him.
JER 39:10 But he left behind in the land of Judah some of the poor people who owned nothing. He gave them fields and vineyards at that time.
JER 39:11 Now King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had issued orders concerning Jeremiah. He had passed them on through Nebuzaradan, the captain of his royal guard,
JER 39:12 “Find Jeremiah and look out for him. Do not do anything to harm him, but do with him whatever he tells you.”
JER 39:13 So Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, Nebushazban, who was a chief officer, Nergal-Sharezer, who was a high official, and all the other officers of the king of Babylon
JER 39:14 sent and had Jeremiah brought from the courtyard of the guardhouse. They turned him over to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam and the grandson of Shaphan, to take him home with him. But Jeremiah stayed among the people.
JER 39:15 Now the Lord had spoken to Jeremiah while he was still confined in the courtyard of the guardhouse,
JER 39:16 “Go and tell Ebed-Melech the Ethiopian, ‘The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “I will carry out against this city what I promised. It will mean disaster and not good fortune for it. When that disaster happens, you will be there to see it.
JER 39:17 But I will rescue you when it happens. I, the Lord, affirm it! You will not be handed over to those whom you fear.
JER 39:18 I will certainly save you. You will not fall victim to violence. You will escape with your life because you trust in me. I, the Lord, affirm it!”’”
JER 40:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah after Nebuzaradan the captain of the royal guard had set him free at Ramah. He had taken him there in chains along with all the people from Jerusalem and Judah who were being carried off to exile to Babylon.
JER 40:2 The captain of the royal guard took Jeremiah aside and said to him, “The Lord your God threatened this place with this disaster.
JER 40:3 Now he has brought it about. The Lord has done just as he threatened to do. This disaster has happened because you people sinned against the Lord and did not obey him.
JER 40:4 But now, Jeremiah, today I will set you free from the chains on your wrists. If you would like to come to Babylon with me, come along and I will take care of you. But if you prefer not to come to Babylon with me, you are not required to do so. You are free to go anywhere in the land you want to go. Go wherever you choose.”
JER 40:5 Before Jeremiah could turn to leave, the captain of the guard added, “Go back to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon appointed to govern the towns of Judah. Go back and live with him among the people. Or go wherever else you choose.” Then the captain of the guard gave Jeremiah some food and a present and let him go.
JER 40:6 So Jeremiah went to Gedaliah son of Ahikam at Mizpah and lived there with him. He stayed there to live among the people who had been left in the land of Judah.
JER 40:7 Now some of the officers of the Judean army and their troops had been hiding in the countryside. They heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam to govern the country. They also heard that he had been put in charge over the men, women, and children from the poorer classes of the land who had not been carried off into exile in Babylon.
JER 40:8 So all these officers and their troops came to Gedaliah at Mizpah. The officers who came were Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, Seraiah son of Tanhumeth, the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah son of the Maacathite.
JER 40:9 Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan, took an oath so as to give them and their troops some assurance of safety. “Do not be afraid to submit to the Babylonians. Settle down in the land and submit to the king of Babylon. Then things will go well for you.
JER 40:10 I for my part will stay at Mizpah to represent you before the Babylonians whenever they come to us. You for your part go ahead and harvest the wine, the dates, the figs, and the olive oil, and store them in jars. Go ahead and settle down in the towns that you have taken over.”
JER 40:11 Moreover, all the Judeans who were in Moab, Ammon, Edom, and all the other countries heard what had happened. They heard that the king of Babylon had allowed some people to stay in Judah and that he had appointed Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan, to govern them.
JER 40:12 So all these Judeans returned to the land of Judah from the places where they had been scattered. They came to Gedaliah at Mizpah. Thus they harvested a large amount of wine and dates and figs.
JER 40:13 Johanan and all the officers of the troops that had been hiding in the open country came to Gedaliah at Mizpah.
JER 40:14 They said to him, “Are you at all aware that King Baalis of Ammon has sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah to kill you?” But Gedaliah son of Ahikam would not believe them.
JER 40:15 Then Johanan son of Kareah spoke privately to Gedaliah there at Mizpah, “Let me go and kill Ishmael the son of Nethaniah before anyone knows about it. Otherwise he will kill you and all the Judeans who have rallied around you will be scattered. Then what remains of Judah will disappear.”
JER 40:16 But Gedaliah son of Ahikam said to Johanan son of Kareah, “Do not do that because what you are saying about Ishmael is not true.”
JER 41:1 But in the seventh month Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama who was a member of the royal family and had been one of Zedekiah’s chief officers, came with ten of his men to Gedaliah son of Ahikam at Mizpah. While they were eating a meal together with him there at Mizpah,
JER 41:2 Ishmael son of Nethaniah and the ten men who were with him stood up, pulled out their swords, and killed Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan. Thus Ishmael killed the man that the king of Babylon had appointed to govern the country.
JER 41:3 Ishmael also killed all the Judeans who were with Gedaliah at Mizpah and the Babylonian soldiers who happened to be there.
JER 41:4 On the day after Gedaliah had been murdered, before anyone even knew about it,
JER 41:5 eighty men arrived from Shechem, Shiloh, and Samaria.
JER 41:6 Ishmael son of Nethaniah went out from Mizpah to meet them. He was pretending to cry as he walked along. When he met them, he said to them, “Come with me to meet Gedaliah son of Ahikam.”
JER 41:7 But as soon as they were inside the city, Ishmael son of Nethaniah and the men who were with him slaughtered them and threw their bodies in a cistern.
JER 41:8 But there were ten men among them who said to Ishmael, “Do not kill us. For we will give you the stores of wheat, barley, olive oil, and honey we have hidden in a field. So he spared their lives and did not kill them along with the rest.
JER 41:9 Now the cistern where Ishmael threw all the dead bodies of those he had killed was a large one that King Asa had constructed as part of his defenses against King Baasha of Israel. Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled it with dead bodies.
JER 41:10 Then Ishmael took captive all the people who were still left alive in Mizpah. This included the royal princesses and all the rest of the people in Mizpah that Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, had put under the authority of Gedaliah son of Ahikam. Ishmael son of Nethaniah took all these people captive and set out to cross over to the Ammonites.
JER 41:11 Johanan son of Kareah and all the army officers who were with him heard about all the atrocities that Ishmael son of Nethaniah had committed.
JER 41:12 So they took all their troops and went to fight against Ishmael son of Nethaniah. They caught up with him near the large pool at Gibeon.
JER 41:13 When all the people that Ishmael had taken captive saw Johanan son of Kareah and all the army officers with him, they were glad.
JER 41:14 All those people that Ishmael had taken captive from Mizpah turned and went over to Johanan son of Kareah.
JER 41:15 But Ishmael son of Nethaniah managed to escape from Johanan along with eight of his men, and he went on over to Ammon.
JER 41:16 Johanan son of Kareah and all the army officers who were with him led off all the people who had been left alive at Mizpah. They had rescued them from Ishmael son of Nethaniah after he killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam. They led off the men, women, children, soldiers, and court officials whom they had brought away from Gibeon.
JER 41:17 They set out to go to Egypt to get away from the Babylonians, but stopped at Geruth Kimham near Bethlehem.
JER 41:18 They were afraid of what the Babylonians might do because Ishmael son of Nethaniah had killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed to govern the country.
JER 42:1 Then all the army officers, including Johanan son of Kareah and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah and all the people of every class, went to the prophet Jeremiah.
JER 42:2 They said to him, “Please grant our request and pray to the Lord your God for all those of us who are still left alive here. For, as you yourself can see, there are only a few of us left out of the many there were before.
JER 42:3 Pray that the Lord your God will tell us where we should go and what we should do.”
JER 42:4 The prophet Jeremiah answered them, “Agreed! I will indeed pray to the Lord your God as you have asked. I will tell you everything the Lord replies in response to you. I will not keep anything back from you.”
JER 42:5 They answered Jeremiah, “May the Lord be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not do just as the Lord sends you to tell us to do.
JER 42:6 We will obey what the Lord our God to whom we are sending you tells us to do. It does not matter whether we like what he tells us or not. We will obey what he tells us to do so that things will go well for us.”
JER 42:7 Ten days later the Lord spoke to Jeremiah.
JER 42:8 So Jeremiah summoned Johanan son of Kareah and all the army officers who were with him and all the people of every class.
JER 42:9 Then Jeremiah said to them, “You sent me to the Lord God of Israel to make your request known to him. Here is what he says to you:
JER 42:10 ‘If you will just stay in this land, I will build you up. I will not tear you down. I will firmly plant you. I will not uproot you. For I am filled with sorrow because of the disaster that I have brought on you.
JER 42:11 Do not be afraid of the king of Babylon whom you now fear. Do not be afraid of him because I will be with you to save you and to rescue you from his power. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 42:12 I will have compassion on you so that he in turn will have mercy on you and allow you to return to your land.’
JER 42:13 “You must not disobey the Lord your God by saying, ‘We will not stay in this land.’
JER 42:14 You must not say, ‘No, we will not stay. Instead we will go and live in the land of Egypt where we will not face war, or hear the enemy’s trumpet calls, or starve for lack of food.’
JER 42:15 If you people who remain in Judah do that, then listen to what the Lord says. The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘If you are so determined to go to Egypt that you go and settle there,
JER 42:16 the wars you fear will catch up with you there in the land of Egypt. The starvation you are worried about will follow you there to Egypt. You will die there.
JER 42:17 All the people who are determined to go and settle in Egypt will die from war, starvation, or disease. No one will survive or escape the disaster I will bring on them.’
JER 42:18 For the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘If you go to Egypt, I will pour out my wrath on you just as I poured out my anger and wrath on the citizens of Jerusalem. You will become an object of horror and ridicule, an example of those who have been cursed and that people use in pronouncing a curse. You will never see this place again.’
JER 42:19 “The Lord has told you people who remain in Judah, ‘Do not go to Egypt.’ Be very sure of this: I warn you here and now.
JER 42:20 You are making a fatal mistake. For you sent me to the Lord your God and asked me, ‘Pray to the Lord our God for us. Tell us what the Lord our God says and we will do it.’
JER 42:21 This day I have told you what he said. But you do not want to obey the Lord by doing what he sent me to tell you.
JER 42:22 So now be very sure of this: You will die from war, starvation, or disease in the place where you want to go and live.”
JER 43:1 Jeremiah finished telling all the people all these things the Lord their God had sent him to tell them.
JER 43:2 Then Azariah son of Hoshaiah, Johanan son of Kareah, and other arrogant men said to Jeremiah, “You are telling a lie! The Lord our God did not send you to tell us, ‘You must not go to Egypt and settle there.’
JER 43:3 But Baruch son of Neriah is stirring you up against us. He wants to hand us over to the Babylonians so that they will kill us or carry us off into exile in Babylon.”
JER 43:4 So Johanan son of Kareah, all the army officers, and all the rest of the people did not obey the Lord’s command to stay in the land.
JER 43:5 Instead Johanan son of Kareah and all the army officers led off all the Judean remnant who had come back to live in the land of Judah from all the nations where they had been scattered.
JER 43:6 They also led off all the men, women, children, and royal princesses that Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, had left with Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan. This included the prophet Jeremiah and Baruch son of Neriah.
JER 43:7 They went on to Egypt because they refused to obey the Lord, and came to Tahpanhes.
JER 43:8 At Tahpanhes the Lord spoke to Jeremiah.
JER 43:9 “Take some large stones and bury them in the mortar of the clay pavement at the entrance of Pharaoh’s residence here in Tahpanhes. Do it while the people of Judah present there are watching.
JER 43:10 Then tell them, ‘The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “I will bring my servant King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. I will set his throne over these stones which I have buried. He will pitch his royal tent over them.
JER 43:11 He will come and attack Egypt. Those who are destined to die of disease will die of disease. Those who are destined to be carried off into exile will be carried off into exile. Those who are destined to die in war will die in war.
JER 43:12 He will set fire to the temples of the gods of Egypt. He will burn their gods or carry them off as captives. He will pick Egypt clean like a shepherd picks the lice from his clothing. He will leave there unharmed.
JER 43:13 He will demolish the sacred pillars in the temple of the sun in Egypt and will burn down the temples of the gods of Egypt.”’”
JER 44:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah concerning all the Judeans who were living in the land of Egypt, those in Migdol, Tahpanhes, Memphis, and in the region of southern Egypt.
JER 44:2 “The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘You have seen all the disaster I brought on Jerusalem and all the towns of Judah. Indeed, they now lie in ruins and are deserted.
JER 44:3 This happened because of the wickedness the people living there did. They made me angry by worshiping and offering sacrifice to other gods whom neither they nor you nor your ancestors previously knew.
JER 44:4 I sent my servants the prophets to you people over and over again warning you not to do this disgusting thing I hate.
JER 44:5 But the people of Jerusalem and Judah would not listen or pay any attention. They would not stop the wickedness they were doing nor quit sacrificing to other gods.
JER 44:6 So my anger and my wrath were poured out and burned like a fire through the towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem. That is why they have become the desolate ruins that they are today.’
JER 44:7 “So now the Lord, the God who rules over all, the God of Israel, asks, ‘Why will you do such great harm to yourselves? Why should every man, woman, child, and baby of yours be destroyed from the midst of Judah? Why should you leave yourselves without a remnant?
JER 44:8 That is what will result from your making me angry by what you are doing. You are making me angry by sacrificing to other gods here in the land of Egypt where you live. You will be destroyed for doing that! You will become an example used in curses and an object of ridicule among all the nations of the earth.
JER 44:9 Have you forgotten all the wicked things that have been done in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem by your ancestors, by the kings of Judah and their wives, by you and your wives?
JER 44:10 To this day your people have shown no contrition! They have not revered me nor followed the laws and statutes I commanded you and your ancestors.’
JER 44:11 “Because of this, the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘I am determined to bring disaster on you, even to the point of destroying all the Judeans here.
JER 44:12 I will see to it that all the Judean remnant that was determined to go and live in the land of Egypt will be destroyed. Here in the land of Egypt they will fall in battle or perish from starvation. People of every class will die in war or from starvation. They will become an object of horror and ridicule, an example of those who have been cursed and that people use in pronouncing a curse.
JER 44:13 I will punish those who live in the land of Egypt with war, starvation, and disease just as I punished Jerusalem.
JER 44:14 None of the Judean remnant who have come to live in the land of Egypt will escape or survive to return to the land of Judah. Though they long to return and live there, none of them shall return except a few fugitives.’”
JER 44:15 Then all the men who were aware that their wives were sacrificing to other gods, as well as all their wives, answered Jeremiah. There was a great crowd of them representing all the people who lived in northern and southern Egypt. They answered,
JER 44:16 “We will not listen to what you claim the Lord has spoken to us!
JER 44:17 Instead we will do everything we vowed we would do. We will sacrifice and pour out drink offerings to the goddess called the Queen of Heaven just as we and our ancestors, our kings, and our leaders previously did in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem. For then we had plenty of food, were well-off, and had no troubles.
JER 44:18 But ever since we stopped sacrificing and pouring out drink offerings to the Queen of Heaven, we have been in great need. Our people have died in wars or of starvation.”
JER 44:19 The women added, “We did indeed sacrifice and pour out drink offerings to the Queen of Heaven. But it was with the full knowledge and approval of our husbands that we made cakes in her image and poured out drink offerings to her.”
JER 44:20 Then Jeremiah replied to all the people, both men and women, who responded to him in this way.
JER 44:21 “The Lord did indeed remember and call to mind what you did! He remembered the sacrifices you and your ancestors, your kings, your leaders, and all the rest of the people of the land offered to other gods in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem.
JER 44:22 Finally the Lord could no longer endure your wicked deeds and the disgusting things you did. That is why your land has become the desolate, uninhabited ruin that it is today. That is why it has become a proverbial example used in curses.
JER 44:23 You have sacrificed to other gods! You have sinned against the Lord! You have not obeyed the Lord! You have not followed his laws, his statutes, and his decrees! That is why this disaster that is evident to this day has happened to you.”
JER 44:24 Then Jeremiah spoke to all the people, particularly to all the women. “Listen to what the Lord has to say all you people of Judah who are in Egypt.
JER 44:25 The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘You women have confirmed by your actions what you vowed with your lips! You said, “We will certainly carry out our vows to sacrifice and pour out drink offerings to the Queen of Heaven.” Well, then fulfill your vows! Carry them out!’
JER 44:26 But listen to what the Lord has to say, all you people of Judah who are living in the land of Egypt. The Lord says, ‘I hereby swear by my own great name that none of the people of Judah who are living anywhere in Egypt will ever again invoke my name in their oaths! Never again will any of them use it in an oath saying, “As surely as the Lord God lives….”
JER 44:27 I will indeed see to it that disaster, not prosperity, happens to them. All the people of Judah who are in the land of Egypt will die in war or from starvation until not one of them is left.
JER 44:28 Some who survive in battle will return to the land of Judah from the land of Egypt. But they will be very few indeed! Then the Judean remnant who have come to live in the land of Egypt will know whose word proves true, mine or theirs.’
JER 44:29 Moreover the Lord says, ‘I will make something happen to prove that I will punish you in this place. I will do it so that you will know that my threats to bring disaster on you will prove true.
JER 44:30 I, the Lord, promise that I will hand Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt over to his enemies who are seeking to kill him. I will do that just as surely as I handed King Zedekiah of Judah over to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, his enemy who was seeking to kill him.’”
JER 45:1 The prophet Jeremiah spoke to Baruch son of Neriah while he was writing down in a scroll the words that Jeremiah spoke to him. This happened in the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was ruling over Judah.
JER 45:2 “The Lord God of Israel has a message for you, Baruch.
JER 45:3 ‘You have said, “I feel so hopeless! For the Lord has added sorrow to my suffering. I am worn out from groaning. I can’t find any rest.”’”
JER 45:4 The Lord told Jeremiah, “Tell Baruch, ‘The Lord says, “I am about to tear down what I have built and to uproot what I have planted. I will do this throughout the whole earth.
JER 45:5 Are you looking for great things for yourself? Do not look for such things. For I, the Lord, affirm that I am about to bring disaster on all humanity. But I will allow you to escape with your life wherever you go.”’”
JER 46:1 The Lord spoke to Jeremiah about the nations.
JER 46:2 He spoke about Egypt and the army of Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt which was encamped along the Euphrates River at Carchemish. Now this was the army that King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon defeated in the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was ruling over Judah.
JER 46:3 “Fall into ranks with your shields ready! Prepare to march into battle!
JER 46:4 Harness the horses to the chariots! Mount your horses! Put on your helmets and take your positions! Sharpen you spears! Put on your armor!
JER 46:5 What do I see?” says the Lord. “The soldiers are terrified. They are retreating. They have been defeated. They are overcome with terror; they desert quickly without looking back.
JER 46:6 But even the swiftest cannot get away. Even the strongest cannot escape. There in the north by the Euphrates River they stumble and fall in defeat.
JER 46:7 “Who is this that rises like the Nile, like its streams turbulent at flood stage?
JER 46:8 Egypt rises like the Nile, like its streams turbulent at flood stage. Egypt says, ‘I will arise and cover the earth. I will destroy cities and the people who inhabit them.’
JER 46:9 Go ahead and charge into battle, you horsemen! Drive furiously, you charioteers! Let the soldiers march out into battle, those from Ethiopia and Libya who carry shields, and those from Lydia who are armed with the bow.
JER 46:10 But that day belongs to the Lord God who rules over all. It is the day when he will pay back his enemies. His sword will devour them until its appetite is satisfied! It will drink their blood until it is full! For the Lord God who rules over all will offer them up as a sacrifice in the land of the north by the Euphrates River.
JER 46:11 Go up to Gilead and get medicinal ointment, you dear poor people of Egypt. But it will prove useless no matter how much medicine you use; there will be no healing for you.
JER 46:12 The nations will hear of your devastating defeat. your cries of distress will echo throughout the earth. In the panic of their flight one soldier will trip over another and both of them will fall down defeated.”
JER 46:13 The Lord spoke to the prophet Jeremiah about Nebuchadnezzar coming to attack the land of Egypt.
JER 46:14 “Make an announcement throughout Egypt. Proclaim it in Migdol, Memphis, and Tahpanhes. ‘Take your positions and prepare to do battle. For the enemy army is destroying all the nations around you.’
JER 46:15 Why will your soldiers be defeated? They will not stand because I, the Lord, will thrust them down.
JER 46:16 I will make many stumble. They will fall over one another in their hurry to flee. They will say, ‘Get up! Let’s go back to our own people. Let’s go back to our homelands because the enemy is coming to destroy us.’
JER 46:17 There at home they will say, ‘Pharaoh king of Egypt is just a big noise! He has let the most opportune moment pass by.’
JER 46:18 I the King, whose name is the Lord who rules over all, swear this: I swear as surely as I live that a conqueror is coming. He will be as imposing as Mount Tabor is among the mountains, as Mount Carmel is against the backdrop of the sea.
JER 46:19 Pack your bags for exile, you inhabitants of poor dear Egypt. For Memphis will be laid waste. It will lie in ruins and be uninhabited.
JER 46:20 Egypt is like a beautiful young cow. But northern armies will attack her like swarms of stinging flies.
JER 46:21 Even her mercenaries will prove to be like pampered, well-fed calves. For they too will turn and run away. They will not stand their ground when the time for them to be destroyed comes, the time for them to be punished.
JER 46:22 Egypt will run away, hissing like a snake, as the enemy comes marching up in force. They will come against her with axes as if they were woodsmen chopping down trees.
JER 46:23 The population of Egypt is like a vast, impenetrable forest. But I, the Lord, affirm that the enemy will cut them down. For those who chop them down will be more numerous than locusts. They will be too numerous to count.
JER 46:24 Poor dear Egypt will be put to shame. She will be handed over to the people from the north.”
JER 46:25 The Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, “I will punish Amon, the god of Thebes. I will punish Egypt, its gods, and its kings. I will punish Pharaoh and all who trust in him.
JER 46:26 I will hand them over to Nebuchadnezzar and his troops, who want to kill them. But later on, people will live in Egypt again as they did in former times. I, the Lord, affirm it!”
JER 46:27 “You descendants of Jacob, my servants, do not be afraid; do not be terrified, people of Israel. For I will rescue you and your descendants from the faraway lands where you are captives. The descendants of Jacob will return to their land and enjoy peace. They will be secure and no one will terrify them.
JER 46:28 I, the Lord, tell you not to be afraid, you descendants of Jacob, my servant, for I am with you. Though I completely destroy all the nations where I scatter you, I will not completely destroy you. I will indeed discipline you but only in due measure. I will not allow you to go entirely unpunished.”
JER 47:1 The Lord spoke to the prophet Jeremiah about the Philistines before Pharaoh attacked Gaza.
JER 47:2 “Look! Enemies are gathering in the north like water rising in a river. They will be like an overflowing stream. They will overwhelm the whole country and everything in it like a flood. They will overwhelm the cities and their inhabitants. People will cry out in alarm. Everyone living in the country will cry out in pain.
JER 47:3 Fathers will hear the hoofbeats of the enemies’ horses, the clatter of their chariots and the rumbling of their wheels. They will not turn back to save their children because they will be paralyzed with fear.
JER 47:4 For the time has come to destroy all the Philistines. The time has come to destroy all the help that remains for Tyre For I, the Lord, will destroy the Philistines, that remnant that came from the island of Crete.
JER 47:5 The people of Gaza will shave their heads in mourning. The people of Ashkelon will be struck dumb. How long will you gash yourselves to show your sorrow, you who remain of Philistia’s power?
JER 47:6 How long will you cry out, ‘Oh, sword of the Lord, how long will it be before you stop killing? Go back into your sheath! Stay there and rest!’
JER 47:7 But how can it rest when I, the Lord, have given it orders? I have ordered it to attack the people of Ashkelon and the seacoast.
JER 48:1 The Lord God of Israel who rules over all spoke about Moab. “Sure to be judged is Nebo! Indeed, it will be destroyed! Kiriathaim will suffer disgrace. It will be captured! Its fortress will suffer disgrace. It will be torn down!
JER 48:2 People will not praise Moab any more. The enemy will capture Heshbon and plot how to destroy Moab, saying, ‘Come, let’s put an end to that nation!’ City of Madmen, you will also be destroyed. A destructive army will march against you.
JER 48:3 Cries of anguish will arise in Horonaim, ‘Oh, the ruin and great destruction!’
JER 48:4 “Moab will be crushed. Her children will cry out in distress.
JER 48:5 Indeed they will climb the slopes of Luhith, weeping continually as they go. For on the road down to Horonaim they will hear the cries of distress over the destruction.
JER 48:6 They will hear, ‘Run! Save yourselves! Even if you must be like a lonely shrub in the desert!’
JER 48:7 “Moab, you trust in the things you do and in your riches. So you too will be conquered. Your god Chemosh will go into exile along with his priests and his officials.
JER 48:8 The destroyer will come against every town. Not one town will escape. The towns in the valley will be destroyed. The cities on the high plain will be laid waste. I, the Lord, have spoken!
JER 48:9 Set up a gravestone for Moab, for it will certainly be laid in ruins! Its cities will be laid waste and become uninhabited.”
JER 48:10 A curse on anyone who is lax in doing the Lord’s work! A curse on anyone who keeps from carrying out his destruction!
JER 48:11 “From its earliest days Moab has lived undisturbed. It has never been taken into exile. Its people are like wine allowed to settle undisturbed on its dregs, never poured out from one jar to another. They are like wine which tastes like it always did, whose aroma has remained unchanged.
JER 48:12 But the time is coming when I will send men against Moab who will empty it out. They will empty the towns of their people, then will lay those towns in ruins. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 48:13 The people of Moab will be disappointed by their god Chemosh. They will be as disappointed as the people of Israel were when they put their trust in the calf god at Bethel.
JER 48:14 How can you men of Moab say, ‘We are heroes, men who are mighty in battle?’
JER 48:15 Moab will be destroyed. Its towns will be invaded. Its finest young men will be slaughtered. I, the King, the Lord who rules over all, affirm it!
JER 48:16 Moab’s destruction is at hand. Disaster will come on it quickly.
JER 48:17 Mourn for that nation, all you nations living around it, all of you nations that know of its fame. Mourn and say, ‘Alas, its powerful influence has been broken! Its glory and power have been done away!’
JER 48:18 Come down from your place of honor; sit on the dry ground, you who live in Dibon. For the one who will destroy Moab will attack you; he will destroy your fortifications.
JER 48:19 You who live in Aroer, stand by the road and watch. Question the man who is fleeing and the woman who is escaping. Ask them, ‘What has happened?’
JER 48:20 They will answer, ‘Moab is disgraced, for it has fallen! Wail and cry out in mourning! Announce along the Arnon River that Moab has been destroyed.’
JER 48:21 “Judgment will come on the cities on the high plain: on Holon, Jahzah, and Mephaath,
JER 48:22 on Dibon, Nebo, and Beth Diblathaim,
JER 48:23 on Kiriathaim, Beth Gamul, and Beth Meon,
JER 48:24 on Kerioth and Bozrah. It will come on all the towns of Moab, both far and near.
JER 48:25 Moab’s might will be crushed. Its power will be broken. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 48:26 “Moab has vaunted itself against me. So make him drunk with the wine of my wrath until he splashes around in his own vomit, until others treat him as a laughingstock.
JER 48:27 For did not you people of Moab laugh at the people of Israel? Did you think that they were nothing but thieves, that you shook your head in contempt every time you talked about them?
JER 48:28 Leave your towns, you inhabitants of Moab. Go and live in the cliffs. Be like a dove that makes its nest high on the sides of a ravine.
JER 48:29 I have heard how proud the people of Moab are, I know how haughty they are. I have heard how arrogant, proud, and haughty they are, what a high opinion they have of themselves.
JER 48:30 I, the Lord, affirm that I know how arrogant they are. But their pride is ill-founded. Their boastings will prove to be false.
JER 48:31 So I will weep with sorrow for Moab. I will cry out in sadness for all of Moab. I will moan for the people of Kir Heres.
JER 48:32 I will weep for the grapevines of Sibmah just like the town of Jazer weeps over them. Their branches once spread as far as the Dead Sea. They reached as far as the town of Jazer. The destroyer will ravage her fig, date, and grape crops.
JER 48:33 Joy and gladness will disappear from the fruitful land of Moab. I will stop the flow of wine from the winepresses. No one will stomp on the grapes there and shout for joy. The shouts there will be shouts of soldiers, not the shouts of those making wine.
JER 48:34 Cries of anguish raised from Heshbon and Elealeh will be sounded as far as Jahaz. They will be sounded from Zoar as far as Horonaim and Eglath Shelishiyah. For even the waters of Nimrim will be dried up.
JER 48:35 I will put an end in Moab to those who make offerings at her places of worship. I will put an end to those who sacrifice to other gods. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 48:36 So my heart moans for Moab like a flute playing a funeral song. Yes, like a flute playing a funeral song, my heart moans for the people of Kir Heres. For the wealth they have gained will perish.
JER 48:37 For all of them will shave their heads in mourning. They will all cut off their beards to show their sorrow. They will all make gashes in their hands. They will all put on sackcloth.
JER 48:38 On all the housetops in Moab and in all its public squares there will be nothing but mourning. For I will break Moab like an unwanted jar. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 48:39 Oh, how shattered Moab will be! Oh, how her people will wail! Oh, how she will turn away in shame! Moab will become an object of ridicule, a terrifying sight to all the nations that surround her.”
JER 48:40 For the Lord says, “Look! Like an eagle with outspread wings a nation will swoop down on Moab.
JER 48:41 Her towns will be captured. Her fortresses will be taken. At that time the soldiers of Moab will be frightened like a woman in labor.
JER 48:42 Moab will be destroyed and no longer be a nation, because she has vaunted herself against the Lord.
JER 48:43 Terror, pits, and traps are in store for the people who live in Moab. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 48:44 Anyone who flees at the sound of terror will fall into a pit. Anyone who climbs out of the pit will be caught in a trap. For the time is coming when I will punish the people of Moab. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 48:45 In the shadows of the walls of Heshbon those trying to escape will stand helpless. For a fire will burst forth from Heshbon. Flames will shoot out from the former territory of Sihon. They will burn the foreheads of the people of Moab, the skulls of those war-loving people.
JER 48:46 Moab, you are doomed! You people who worship Chemosh will be destroyed. Your sons will be taken away captive. Your daughters will be carried away into exile.
JER 48:47 Yet in days to come I will reverse Moab’s ill fortune.” says the Lord. The judgment against Moab ends here.
JER 49:1 The Lord spoke about the Ammonites. “Do you think there are not any people of the nation of Israel remaining? Do you think there are not any of them remaining to reinherit their land? Is that why you people who worship the god Milcom have taken possession of the territory of Gad and live in his cities?
JER 49:2 Because you did that, I, the Lord, affirm that a time is coming when I will make Rabbah, the capital city of Ammon, hear the sound of the battle cry. It will become a mound covered with ruins. Its villages will be burned to the ground. Then Israel will take back its land from those who took their land from them. I, the Lord, affirm it!
JER 49:3 Wail, you people in Heshbon, because Ai in Ammon is destroyed. Cry out in anguish, you people in the villages surrounding Rabbah. Put on sackcloth and cry out in mourning. Run about covered with gashes. For your god Milcom will go into exile along with his priests and officials.
JER 49:4 Why do you brag about your great power? Your power is ebbing away, you rebellious people of Ammon, who trust in your riches and say, ‘Who would dare to attack us?’
JER 49:5 I will bring terror on you from every side,” says the Lord God who rules over all. “You will be scattered in every direction. No one will gather the fugitives back together.
JER 49:6 Yet in days to come I will reverse Ammon’s ill fortune.” says the Lord.
JER 49:7 The Lord who rules over all spoke about Edom. “Is wisdom no longer to be found in Teman? Can Edom’s counselors not give her any good advice? Has all of their wisdom turned bad?
JER 49:8 Turn and flee! Take up refuge in remote places, you people who live in Dedan. For I will bring disaster on the descendants of Esau. I have decided it is time for me to punish them.
JER 49:9 If grape pickers came to pick your grapes, would they not leave a few grapes behind? If robbers came at night, would they not pillage only what they needed?
JER 49:10 But I will strip everything away from Esau’s descendants. I will uncover their hiding places so they cannot hide. Their children, relatives, and neighbors will all be destroyed. Not one of them will be left!
JER 49:11 Leave your orphans behind and I will keep them alive. Your widows too can depend on me.”
JER 49:12 For the Lord says, “If even those who did not deserve to drink from the cup of my wrath must drink from it, do you think you will go unpunished? You will not go unpunished, but must certainly drink from the cup of my wrath.
JER 49:13 For I solemnly swear,” says the Lord, “that Bozrah will become a pile of ruins. It will become an object of horror and ridicule, an example to be used in curses. All the towns around it will lie in ruins forever.”
JER 49:14 I said, “I have heard a message from the Lord. A messenger has been sent among the nations to say, ‘Gather your armies and march out against her! Prepare to do battle with her!’”
JER 49:15 The Lord says to Edom, “I will certainly make you small among nations. I will make you despised by all humankind.
JER 49:16 The terror you inspire in others and the arrogance of your heart have deceived you. You may make your home in the clefts of the rocks; you may occupy the highest places in the hills. But even if you made your home where the eagles nest, I would bring you down from there,” says the Lord.
JER 49:17 “Edom will become an object of horror. All who pass by it will be filled with horror; they will hiss out their scorn because of all the disasters that have happened to it.
JER 49:18 Edom will be destroyed like Sodom and Gomorrah and the towns that were around them. No one will live there. No human being will settle in it,” says the Lord.
JER 49:19 “A lion coming up from the thick undergrowth along the Jordan scatters the sheep in the pastureland around it. So too I will chase the Edomites off their land. Then I will appoint over it whomever I choose. For there is no one like me, and there is no one who can call me to account. There is no ruler who can stand up against me.
JER 49:20 So listen to what I, the Lord, have planned against Edom, what I intend to do to the people who live in Teman. Their little ones will be dragged off. I will completely destroy their land because of what they have done.
JER 49:21 The people of the earth will quake when they hear of their downfall. Their cries of anguish will be heard all the way to the Gulf of Aqaba.
JER 49:22 Look! Like an eagle with outspread wings, a nation will soar up and swoop down on Bozrah. At that time the soldiers of Edom will be as fearful as a woman in labor.”
JER 49:23 The Lord spoke about Damascus. “The people of Hamath and Arpad will be dismayed because they have heard bad news. Their courage will melt away because of worry. Their hearts will not be able to rest.
JER 49:24 The people of Damascus will lose heart and turn to flee. Panic will grip them. Pain and anguish will seize them like a woman in labor.
JER 49:25 How deserted will that once-famous city be, that city that was once filled with joy!
JER 49:26 For her young men will fall in her city squares. All her soldiers will be destroyed at that time,” says the Lord who rules over all.
JER 49:27 “I will set fire to the walls of Damascus; it will burn up the palaces of Ben Hadad.”
JER 49:28 The Lord spoke about Kedar and the kingdoms of Hazor that King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon conquered. “Army of Babylon, go and attack Kedar. Lay waste those who live in the eastern desert.
JER 49:29 Their tents and their flocks will be taken away. Their tent curtains, equipment, and camels will be carried off. People will shout to them, ‘Terror is all around you!’”
JER 49:30 The Lord says, “Flee quickly, you who live in Hazor. Take up refuge in remote places. For King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon has laid out plans to attack you. He has formed his strategy on how to defeat you.”
JER 49:31 The Lord says, “Army of Babylon, go and attack a nation that lives in peace and security. They have no gates or walls to protect them. They live all alone.
JER 49:32 Their camels will be taken as plunder. Their vast herds will be taken as spoil. I will scatter to the four winds those desert peoples who cut their hair short at the temples. I will bring disaster against them from every direction,” says the Lord.
JER 49:33 “Hazor will become a permanent wasteland, a place where only jackals live. No one will live there. No human being will settle in it.”
JER 49:34 Early in the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah, the Lord spoke to the prophet Jeremiah about Elam.
JER 49:35 The Lord who rules over all said, “I will kill all the archers of Elam, who are the chief source of her military might.
JER 49:36 I will cause enemies to blow through Elam from every direction like the winds blowing in from the four quarters of heaven. I will scatter the people of Elam to the four winds. There will not be any nation where the refugees of Elam will not go.
JER 49:37 I will make the people of Elam terrified of their enemies, who are seeking to kill them. I will vent my fierce anger and bring disaster upon them,” says the Lord. “I will send armies chasing after them until I have completely destroyed them.
JER 49:38 I will establish my sovereignty over Elam. I will destroy their king and their leaders,” says the Lord.
JER 49:39 “Yet in days to come I will reverse Elam’s ill fortune.” says the Lord.
JER 50:1 The Lord spoke concerning Babylon and the land of Babylonia through the prophet Jeremiah.
JER 50:2 “Announce the news among the nations! Proclaim it! Signal for people to pay attention! Declare the news! Do not hide it! Say: ‘Babylon will be captured. Bel will be put to shame. Marduk will be dismayed. Babylon’s idols will be put to shame. Her disgusting images will be dismayed.
JER 50:3 For a nation from the north will attack Babylon. It will lay her land waste. People and animals will flee out of it. No one will inhabit it.’
JER 50:4 “When that time comes,” says the Lord, “the people of Israel and Judah will return to the land together. They will come back with tears of repentance as they seek the Lord their God.
JER 50:5 They will ask the way to Zion; they will turn their faces toward it. They will come and bind themselves to the Lord in a lasting covenant that will never be forgotten.
JER 50:6 “My people have been lost sheep. Their shepherds have allowed them to go astray. They have wandered around in the mountains. They have roamed from one mountain and hill to another. They have forgotten their resting place.
JER 50:7 All who encountered them devoured them. Their enemies who did this said, ‘We are not liable for punishment! For those people have sinned against the Lord, their true pasture. They have sinned against the Lord in whom their ancestors trusted.’
JER 50:8 “People of Judah, get out of Babylon quickly! Leave the land of Babylonia! Be the first to depart! Be like the male goats that lead the herd.
JER 50:9 For I will rouse into action and bring against Babylon a host of mighty nations from the land of the north. They will set up their battle lines against her. They will come from the north and capture her. Their arrows will be like a skilled soldier who does not return from the battle empty-handed.
JER 50:10 Babylonia will be plundered. Those who plunder it will take all they want,” says the Lord.
JER 50:11 “People of Babylonia, you plundered my people. That made you happy and glad. You frolic about like calves in a pasture. Your joyous sounds are like the neighs of a stallion.
JER 50:12 But Babylonia will be put to great shame. The land where you were born will be disgraced. Indeed, Babylonia will become the least important of all nations. It will become a dry and barren desert.
JER 50:13 After I vent my wrath on it Babylon will be uninhabited. It will be totally desolate. All who pass by will be filled with horror and will hiss out their scorn because of all the disasters that have happened to it.
JER 50:14 “Take up your battle positions all around Babylon, all you soldiers who are armed with bows. Shoot all your arrows at her! Do not hold any back! For she has sinned against the Lord.
JER 50:15 Shout the battle cry from all around the city. She will throw up her hands in surrender. Her towers will fall. Her walls will be torn down. Because I, the Lord, am wreaking revenge, take out your vengeance on her! Do to her as she has done!
JER 50:16 Kill all the farmers who sow the seed in the land of Babylon. Kill all those who wield the sickle at harvest time. Let all the foreigners return to their own people. Let them hurry back to their own lands to escape destruction by that enemy army.
JER 50:17 “The people of Israel are like scattered sheep which lions have chased away. First the king of Assyria devoured them. Now last of all King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon has gnawed their bones.
JER 50:18 So I, the Lord God of Israel who rules over all, say: ‘I will punish the king of Babylon and his land just as I punished the king of Assyria.
JER 50:19 But I will restore the flock of Israel to their own pasture. They will graze on Mount Carmel and the land of Bashan. They will eat until they are full on the hills of Ephraim and the land of Gilead.
JER 50:20 When that time comes, no guilt will be found in Israel. No sin will be found in Judah. For I will forgive those of them I have allowed to survive. I, the Lord, affirm it!’”
JER 50:21 The Lord says, “Attack the land of Merathaim and the people who live in Pekod! Pursue, kill, and completely destroy them! Do just as I have commanded you!
JER 50:22 The noise of battle can be heard in the land of Babylonia. There is the sound of great destruction.
JER 50:23 Babylon hammered the whole world to pieces. But see how that ‘hammer’ has been broken and shattered! See what an object of horror Babylon has become among the nations!
JER 50:24 I set a trap for you, Babylon; you were caught before you knew it. You fought against me. So you were found and captured.
JER 50:25 I have opened up the place where my weapons are stored. I have brought out the weapons for carrying out my wrath. For I, the Lord God who rules over all, have work to carry out in the land of Babylonia.
JER 50:26 Come from far away and attack Babylonia! Open up the places where she stores her grain! Pile her up in ruins! Destroy her completely! Do not leave anyone alive!
JER 50:27 Kill all her soldiers! Let them be slaughtered! They are doomed, for their day of reckoning has come, the time for them to be punished.”
JER 50:28 Listen! Fugitives and refugees are coming from the land of Babylon. They are coming to Zion to declare there how the Lord our God is getting revenge, getting revenge for what they have done to his temple.
JER 50:29 “Call for archers to come against Babylon! Summon against her all who draw the bow! Set up camp all around the city! Do not allow anyone to escape! Pay her back for what she has done. Do to her what she has done to others. For she has proudly defied me, the Holy One of Israel.
JER 50:30 So her young men will fall in her city squares. All her soldiers will be destroyed at that time,” says the Lord.
JER 50:31 “Listen! I am opposed to you, you proud city,” says the Lord God who rules over all. “Indeed, your day of reckoning has come, the time when I will punish you.
JER 50:32 You will stumble and fall, you proud city; no one will help you get up. I will set fire to your towns; it will burn up everything that surrounds you.”
JER 50:33 The Lord who rules over all says, “The people of Israel are oppressed. So too are the people of Judah. All those who took them captive are holding them prisoners. They refuse to set them free.
JER 50:34 But the one who will rescue them is strong. He is known as the Lord who rules over all. He will strongly champion their cause. As a result he will bring peace and rest to the earth, but trouble and turmoil to the people who inhabit Babylonia.
JER 50:35 “Destructive forces will come against the Babylonians,” says the Lord. “They will come against the people who inhabit Babylonia, against her leaders and her men of wisdom.
JER 50:36 Destructive forces will come against her false prophets; they will be shown to be fools! Destructive forces will come against her soldiers; they will be filled with terror!
JER 50:37 Destructive forces will come against her horses and her chariots. Destructive forces will come against all the foreign troops within her; they will be as frightened as women! Destructive forces will come against her treasures; they will be taken away as plunder!
JER 50:38 A drought will come upon her land; her rivers and canals will be dried up. All of this will happen because her land is filled with idols. Her people act like madmen because of those idols they fear.
JER 50:39 Therefore desert creatures and jackals will live there. Ostriches will dwell in it too. But no people will ever live there again. No one will dwell there for all time to come.
JER 50:40 I will destroy Babylonia just like I did Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighboring towns. No one will live there. No human being will settle in it,” says the Lord.
JER 50:41 “Look! An army is about to come from the north. A mighty nation and many kings are stirring into action in faraway parts of the earth.
JER 50:42 Its soldiers are armed with bows and spears. They are cruel and show no mercy. They sound like the roaring sea as they ride forth on their horses. Lined up in formation like men going into battle, they are coming against you, fair Babylon!
JER 50:43 The king of Babylon will become paralyzed with fear when he hears news of their coming. Anguish will grip him, agony like that of a woman giving birth to a baby.
JER 50:44 “A lion coming up from the thick undergrowth along the Jordan scatters the sheep in the pastureland around it. So too I will chase the Babylonians off of their land. Then I will appoint over it whomever I choose. For there is no one like me. There is no one who can call me to account. There is no ruler that can stand up against me.
JER 50:45 So listen to what I, the Lord, have planned against Babylon, what I intend to do to the people who inhabit the land of Babylonia. Their little ones will be dragged off. I will completely destroy their land because of what they have done.
JER 50:46 The people of the earth will quake when they hear Babylon has been captured. Her cries of anguish will be heard by the other nations.”
JER 51:1 The Lord says, “I will cause a destructive wind to blow against Babylon and the people who inhabit Babylonia.
JER 51:2 I will send people to winnow Babylonia like a wind blowing away chaff. They will winnow her and strip her land bare. This will happen when they come against her from every direction, when it is time to destroy her.
JER 51:3 Do not give her archers time to string their bows or to put on their coats of armor. Do not spare any of her young men. Completely destroy her whole army.
JER 51:4 Let them fall slain in the land of Babylonia, mortally wounded in the streets of her cities.
JER 51:5 “For Israel and Judah will not be forsaken by their God, the Lord who rules over all. For the land of Babylonia is full of guilt against the Holy One of Israel.
JER 51:6 Get out of Babylonia quickly, you foreign people. Flee to save your lives. Do not let yourselves be killed because of her sins. For it is time for the Lord to wreak his revenge. He will pay Babylonia back for what she has done.
JER 51:7 Babylonia had been a gold cup in the Lord’s hand. She had made the whole world drunk. The nations had drunk from the wine of her wrath. So they have all gone mad.
JER 51:8 But suddenly Babylonia will fall and be destroyed. Cry out in mourning over it! Get medicine for her wounds! Perhaps she can be healed!
JER 51:9 Foreigners living there will say, ‘We tried to heal her, but she could not be healed. Let’s leave Babylonia and each go back to his own country. For judgment on her will be vast in its proportions. It will be like it is piled up to heaven, stacked up into the clouds.’
JER 51:10 The exiles from Judah will say, ‘The Lord has brought about a great deliverance for us! Come on, let’s go and proclaim in Zion what the Lord our God has done!’
JER 51:11 “Sharpen your arrows! Fill your quivers! The Lord will arouse a spirit of hostility in the kings of Media. For he intends to destroy Babylonia. For that is how the Lord will get his revenge – how he will get his revenge for the Babylonians’ destruction of his temple.
JER 51:12 Give the signal to attack Babylon’s wall! Bring more guards! Post them all around the city! Put men in ambush! For the Lord will do what he has planned. He will do what he said he would do to the people of Babylon.
JER 51:13 “You who live along the rivers of Babylon, the time of your end has come. You who are rich in plundered treasure, it is time for your lives to be cut off.
JER 51:14 The Lord who rules over all has solemnly sworn, ‘I will fill your land with enemy soldiers. They will swarm over it like locusts. They will raise up shouts of victory over it.’
JER 51:15 He is the one who by his power made the earth. He is the one who by his wisdom fixed the world in place, by his understanding he spread out the heavens.
JER 51:16 When his voice thunders, the waters in the heavens roar. He makes the clouds rise from the far-off horizons. He makes the lightning flash out in the midst of the rain. He unleashes the wind from the places where he stores it.
JER 51:17 All idolaters will prove to be stupid and ignorant. Every goldsmith will be disgraced by the idol he made. For the image he forges is merely a sham. There is no breath in any of those idols.
JER 51:18 They are worthless, objects to be ridiculed. When the time comes to punish them, they will be destroyed.
JER 51:19 The Lord, who is the portion of the descendants of Jacob, is not like them. For he is the one who created everything, including the people of Israel whom he claims as his own. He is known as the Lord who rules over all.
JER 51:20 “Babylon, you are my war club, my weapon for battle. I used you to smash nations. I used you to destroy kingdoms.
JER 51:21 I used you to smash horses and their riders. I used you to smash chariots and their drivers.
JER 51:22 I used you to smash men and women. I used you to smash old men and young men. I used you to smash young men and young women.
JER 51:23 I used you to smash shepherds and their flocks. I used you to smash farmers and their teams of oxen. I used you to smash governors and leaders.”
JER 51:24 “But I will repay Babylon and all who live in Babylonia for all the wicked things they did in Zion right before the eyes of you Judeans,” says the Lord.
JER 51:25 The Lord says, “Beware! I am opposed to you, Babylon! You are like a destructive mountain that destroys all the earth. I will unleash my power against you; I will roll you off the cliffs and make you like a burned-out mountain.
JER 51:26 No one will use any of your stones as a cornerstone. No one will use any of them in the foundation of his house. For you will lie desolate forever,” says the Lord.
JER 51:27 “Raise up battle flags throughout the lands. Sound the trumpets calling the nations to do battle. Prepare the nations to do battle against Babylonia. Call for these kingdoms to attack her: Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz. Appoint a commander to lead the attack. Send horses against her like a swarm of locusts.
JER 51:28 Prepare the nations to do battle against her. Prepare the kings of the Medes. Prepare their governors and all their leaders. Prepare all the countries they rule to do battle against her.
JER 51:29 The earth will tremble and writhe in agony. For the Lord will carry out his plan. He plans to make the land of Babylonia a wasteland where no one lives.
JER 51:30 The soldiers of Babylonia will stop fighting. They will remain in their fortified cities. They will lose their strength to do battle. They will be as frightened as women. The houses in her cities will be set on fire. The gates of her cities will be broken down.
JER 51:31 One runner after another will come to the king of Babylon. One messenger after another will come bringing news. They will bring news to the king of Babylon that his whole city has been captured.
JER 51:32 They will report that the fords have been captured, the reed marshes have been burned, the soldiers are terrified.
JER 51:33 For the Lord God of Israel who rules over all says, ‘Fair Babylon will be like a threshing floor which has been trampled flat for harvest. The time for her to be cut down and harvested will come very soon.’
JER 51:34 “King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon devoured me and drove my people out. Like a monster from the deep he swallowed me. He filled his belly with my riches. He made me an empty dish. He completely cleaned me out.”
JER 51:35 The person who lives in Zion says, “May Babylon pay for the violence done to me and to my relatives.” Jerusalem says, “May those living in Babylonia pay for the bloodshed of my people.”
JER 51:36 Therefore the Lord says, “I will stand up for your cause. I will pay the Babylonians back for what they have done to you. I will dry up their sea. I will make their springs run dry.
JER 51:37 Babylon will become a heap of ruins. Jackals will make their home there. It will become an object of horror and of hissing scorn, a place where no one lives.
JER 51:38 The Babylonians are all like lions roaring for prey. They are like lion cubs growling for something to eat.
JER 51:39 When their appetites are all stirred up, I will set out a banquet for them. I will make them drunk so that they will pass out, they will fall asleep forever, they will never wake up,” says the Lord.
JER 51:40 “I will lead them off to be slaughtered like lambs, rams, and male goats.”
JER 51:41 “See how Babylon has been captured! See how the pride of the whole earth has been taken! See what an object of horror Babylon has become among the nations!
JER 51:42 The sea has swept over Babylon. She has been covered by a multitude of its waves.
JER 51:43 The towns of Babylonia have become heaps of ruins. She has become a dry and barren desert. No one lives in those towns any more. No one even passes through them.
JER 51:44 I will punish the god Bel in Babylon. I will make him spit out what he has swallowed. The nations will not come streaming to him any longer. Indeed, the walls of Babylon will fall.”
JER 51:45 “Get out of Babylon, my people! Flee to save your lives from the fierce anger of the Lord!
JER 51:46 Do not lose your courage or become afraid because of the reports that are heard in the land. For a report will come in one year. Another report will follow it in the next. There will be violence in the land with ruler fighting against ruler.”
JER 51:47 “So the time will certainly come when I will punish the idols of Babylon. Her whole land will be put to shame. All her mortally wounded will collapse in her midst.
JER 51:48 Then heaven and earth and all that is in them will sing for joy over Babylon. For destroyers from the north will attack it,” says the Lord.
JER 51:49 “Babylon must fall because of the Israelites she has killed, just as the earth’s mortally wounded fell because of Babylon.
JER 51:50 You who have escaped the sword, go, do not delay. Remember the Lord in a faraway land. Think about Jerusalem.
JER 51:51 ‘We are ashamed because we have been insulted. Our faces show our disgrace. For foreigners have invaded the holy rooms in the Lord’s temple.’
JER 51:52 Yes, but the time will certainly come,” says the Lord, “when I will punish her idols. Throughout her land the mortally wounded will groan.
JER 51:53 Even if Babylon climbs high into the sky and fortifies her elevated stronghold, I will send destroyers against her,” says the Lord.
JER 51:54 Cries of anguish will come from Babylon, the sound of great destruction from the land of the Babylonians.
JER 51:55 For the Lord is ready to destroy Babylon, and put an end to her loud noise. Their waves will roar like turbulent waters. They will make a deafening noise.
JER 51:56 For a destroyer is attacking Babylon. Her warriors will be captured; their bows will be broken. For the Lord is a God who punishes; he pays back in full.
JER 51:57 “I will make her officials and wise men drunk, along with her governors, leaders, and warriors. They will fall asleep forever and never wake up,” says the King whose name is the Lord who rules over all.
JER 51:58 This is what the Lord who rules over all says, “Babylon’s thick wall will be completely demolished. Her high gates will be set on fire. The peoples strive for what does not satisfy. The nations grow weary trying to get what will be destroyed.”
JER 51:59 This is the order Jeremiah the prophet gave to Seraiah son of Neriah, son of Mahseiah, when he went to King Zedekiah of Judah in Babylon during the fourth year of his reign. (Seraiah was a quartermaster.)
JER 51:60 Jeremiah recorded on one scroll all the judgments that would come upon Babylon – all these prophecies written about Babylon.
JER 51:61 Then Jeremiah said to Seraiah, “When you arrive in Babylon, make sure you read aloud all these prophecies.
JER 51:62 Then say, ‘O Lord, you have announced that you will destroy this place so that no people or animals live in it any longer. Certainly it will lie desolate forever!’
JER 51:63 When you finish reading this scroll aloud, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middle of the Euphrates River.
JER 51:64 Then say, ‘In the same way Babylon will sink and never rise again because of the judgments I am ready to bring upon her; they will grow faint.’” The prophecies of Jeremiah end here.
JER 52:1 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he ruled in Jerusalem for eleven years. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah, from Libnah.
JER 52:2 He did what displeased the Lord just as Jehoiakim had done.
JER 52:3 What follows is a record of what happened to Jerusalem and Judah because of the Lord’s anger when he drove them out of his sight. Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
JER 52:4 King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came against Jerusalem with his whole army and set up camp outside it. They built siege ramps all around it. He arrived on the tenth day of the tenth month in the ninth year that Zedekiah ruled over Judah.
JER 52:5 The city remained under siege until Zedekiah’s eleventh year.
JER 52:6 By the ninth day of the fourth month the famine in the city was so severe the residents had no food.
JER 52:7 They broke through the city walls, and all the soldiers tried to escape. They left the city during the night. They went through the gate between the two walls that is near the king’s garden. (The Babylonians had the city surrounded.) Then they headed for the Jordan Valley.
JER 52:8 But the Babylonian army chased after the king. They caught up with Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and his entire army deserted him.
JER 52:9 They captured him and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah in the territory of Hamath and he passed sentence on him there.
JER 52:10 The king of Babylon had Zedekiah’s sons put to death while Zedekiah was forced to watch. He also had all the nobles of Judah put to death there at Riblah.
JER 52:11 He had Zedekiah’s eyes put out and had him bound in chains. Then the king of Babylon had him led off to Babylon and he was imprisoned there until the day he died.
JER 52:12 On the tenth day of the fifth month, in the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard who served the king of Babylon, arrived in Jerusalem.
JER 52:13 He burned down the Lord’s temple, the royal palace, and all the houses in Jerusalem, including every large house.
JER 52:14 The whole Babylonian army that came with the captain of the royal guard tore down the walls that surrounded Jerusalem.
JER 52:15 Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, took into exile some of the poor, the rest of the people who remained in the city, those who had deserted to him, and the rest of the craftsmen.
JER 52:16 But he left behind some of the poor and gave them fields and vineyards.
JER 52:17 The Babylonians broke the two bronze pillars in the temple of the Lord, as well as the movable stands and the large bronze basin called the “The Sea.” They took all the bronze to Babylon.
JER 52:18 They also took the pots, shovels, trimming shears, basins, pans, and all the bronze utensils used by the priests.
JER 52:19 The captain of the royal guard took the gold and silver bowls, censers, basins, pots, lampstands, pans, and vessels.
JER 52:20 The bronze of the items that King Solomon made for the Lord’s temple (including the two pillars, the large bronze basin called “The Sea,” the twelve bronze bulls under “The Sea,” and the movable stands ) was too heavy to be weighed.
JER 52:21 Each of the pillars was about 27 feet high, about 18 feet in circumference, three inches thick, and hollow.
JER 52:22 The bronze top of one pillar was about seven and one-half feet high and had bronze latticework and pomegranate-shaped ornaments all around it. The second pillar with its pomegranate-shaped ornaments was like it.
JER 52:23 There were ninety-six pomegranate-shaped ornaments on the sides; in all there were one hundred pomegranate-shaped ornaments over the latticework that went around it.
JER 52:24 The captain of the royal guard took Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the priest who was second in rank, and the three doorkeepers.
JER 52:25 From the city he took an official who was in charge of the soldiers, seven of the king’s advisers who were discovered in the city, an official army secretary who drafted citizens for military service, and sixty citizens who were discovered in the middle of the city.
JER 52:26 Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah.
JER 52:27 The king of Babylon ordered them to be executed at Riblah in the territory of Hamath. So Judah was taken into exile away from its land.
JER 52:28 Here is the official record of the number of people Nebuchadnezzar carried into exile: In the seventh year, 3,023 Jews;
JER 52:29 in Nebuchadnezzar’s eighteenth year, 832 people from Jerusalem;
JER 52:30 in Nebuchadnezzar’s twenty-third year, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the royal guard, carried into exile 745 Judeans. In all 4,600 people went into exile.
JER 52:31 In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah, on the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth month, Evil-Merodach, in the first year of his reign, pardoned King Jehoiachin of Judah and released him from prison.
JER 52:32 He spoke kindly to him and gave him a more prestigious position than the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
JER 52:33 Jehoiachin took off his prison clothes and ate daily in the king’s presence for the rest of his life.
JER 52:34 He was given daily provisions by the king of Babylon for the rest of his life until the day he died.
LAM 1:1 Alas! The city once full of people now sits all alone! The prominent lady among the nations has become a widow! The princess who once ruled the provinces has become a forced laborer!
LAM 1:2 She weeps bitterly at night; tears stream down her cheeks. She has no one to comfort her among all her lovers. All her friends have betrayed her; they have become her enemies.
LAM 1:3 Judah has departed into exile under affliction and harsh oppression. She lives among the nations; she has found no resting place. All who pursued her overtook her in narrow straits.
LAM 1:4 The roads to Zion mourn because no one travels to the festivals. All her city gates are deserted; her priests groan. Her virgins grieve; she is in bitter anguish!
LAM 1:5 Her foes subjugated her; her enemies are at ease. For the Lord afflicted her because of her many acts of rebellion. Her children went away captive before the enemy.
LAM 1:6 All of Daughter Zion’s splendor has departed. Her leaders became like deer; they found no pasture, so they were too exhausted to escape from the hunter.
LAM 1:7 Jerusalem remembers, when she became a poor homeless person, all her treasures that she owned in days of old. When her people fell into an enemy’s grip, none of her allies came to her rescue. Her enemies gloated over her; they sneered at her downfall.
LAM 1:8 Jerusalem committed terrible sin; therefore she became an object of scorn. All who admired her have despised her because they have seen her nakedness. She groans aloud and turns away in shame.
LAM 1:9 Her menstrual flow has soiled her clothing; she did not consider the consequences of her sin. Her demise was astonishing, and there was no one to comfort her. She cried, “Look, O Lord, on my affliction because my enemy boasts!”
LAM 1:10 An enemy grabbed all her valuables. Indeed she watched in horror as Gentiles invaded her holy temple – those whom you had commanded: “They must not enter your assembly place.”
LAM 1:11 All her people groaned as they searched for a morsel of bread. They exchanged their valuables for just enough food to stay alive. “Look, O Lord! Consider that I have become worthless!”
LAM 1:12 Is it nothing to you, all you who pass by on the road? Look and see! Is there any pain like mine? The Lord has afflicted me, he has inflicted it on me when he burned with anger.
LAM 1:13 He sent down fire into my bones, and it overcame them. He spread out a trapper’s net for my feet; he made me turn back. He has made me desolate; I am faint all day long.
LAM 1:14 My sins are bound around my neck like a yoke; they are fastened together by his hand. He has placed his yoke on my neck; he has sapped my strength. The Lord has handed me over to those whom I cannot resist.
LAM 1:15 He rounded up all my mighty ones; The Lord did this in my midst. He summoned an assembly against me to shatter my young men. The Lord has stomped like grapes the virgin daughter, Judah.
LAM 1:16 I weep because of these things; my eyes flow with tears. For there is no one in sight who can comfort me or encourage me. My children are desolated because an enemy has prevailed.
LAM 1:17 Zion spread out her hands, but there is no one to comfort her. The Lord has issued a decree against Jacob; his neighbors have become his enemies. Jerusalem has become like filthy garbage in their midst.
LAM 1:18 The Lord is right to judge me! Yes, I rebelled against his commands. Please listen, all you nations, and look at my suffering! My young women and men have gone into exile.
LAM 1:19 I called for my lovers, but they had deceived me. My priests and my elders perished in the city. Truly they had searched for food to keep themselves alive.
LAM 1:20 Look, O Lord! I am distressed; my stomach is in knots! My heart is pounding inside me. Yes, I was terribly rebellious! Out in the street the sword bereaves a mother of her children; Inside the house death is present.
LAM 1:21 They have heard that I groan, yet there is no one to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that you have brought it about. Bring about the day of judgment that you promised so that they may end up like me!
LAM 1:22 Let all their wickedness come before you; afflict them just as you have afflicted me because of all my acts of rebellion. For my groans are many, and my heart is sick with sorrow.
LAM 2:1 Alas! The Lord has covered Daughter Zion with his anger. He has thrown down the splendor of Israel from heaven to earth; he did not protect his temple when he displayed his anger.
LAM 2:2 The Lord destroyed mercilessly all the homes of Jacob’s descendants. In his anger he tore down the fortified cities of Daughter Judah. He knocked to the ground and humiliated the kingdom and its rulers.
LAM 2:3 In fierce anger he destroyed the whole army of Israel. He withdrew his right hand as the enemy attacked. He was like a raging fire in the land of Jacob; it consumed everything around it.
LAM 2:4 He prepared his bow like an enemy; his right hand was ready to shoot. Like a foe he killed everyone, even our strong young men; he has poured out his anger like fire on the tent of Daughter Zion.
LAM 2:5 The Lord, like an enemy, destroyed Israel. He destroyed all her palaces; he ruined her fortified cities. He made everyone in Daughter Judah mourn and lament.
LAM 2:6 He destroyed his temple as if it were a vineyard; he destroyed his appointed meeting place. The Lord has made those in Zion forget both the festivals and the Sabbaths. In his fierce anger he has spurned both king and priest.
LAM 2:7 The Lord rejected his altar and abhorred his temple. He handed over to the enemy her palace walls; the enemy shouted in the Lord’s temple as if it were a feast day.
LAM 2:8 The Lord was determined to tear down Daughter Zion’s wall. He prepared to knock it down; he did not withdraw his hand from destroying. He made the ramparts and fortified walls lament; together they mourned their ruin.
LAM 2:9 Her city gates have fallen to the ground; he smashed to bits the bars that lock her gates. Her king and princes were taken into exile; there is no more guidance available. As for her prophets, they no longer receive a vision from the Lord.
LAM 2:10 The elders of Daughter Zion sit on the ground in silence. They have thrown dirt on their heads; They have dressed in sackcloth. Jerusalem’s young women stare down at the ground.
LAM 2:11 My eyes are worn out from weeping; my stomach is in knots. My heart is poured out on the ground due to the destruction of my helpless people; children and infants faint in the town squares.
LAM 2:12 Children say to their mothers, “Where are food and drink?” They faint like a wounded warrior in the city squares. They die slowly in their mothers’ arms.
LAM 2:13 With what can I equate you? To what can I compare you, O Daughter Jerusalem? To what can I liken you so that I might comfort you, O Virgin Daughter Zion? Your wound is as deep as the sea. Who can heal you?
LAM 2:14 Your prophets saw visions for you that were worthless lies. They failed to expose your sin so as to restore your fortunes. They saw oracles for you that were worthless lies.
LAM 2:15 All who passed by on the road clapped their hands to mock you. They sneered and shook their heads at Daughter Jerusalem. “Ha! Is this the city they called ‘The perfection of beauty, the source of joy of the whole earth!’?”
LAM 2:16 All your enemies gloated over you. They sneered and gnashed their teeth; they said, “We have destroyed her! Ha! We have waited a long time for this day. We have lived to see it!”
LAM 2:17 The Lord has done what he planned; he has fulfilled his promise that he threatened long ago: He has overthrown you without mercy and has enabled the enemy to gloat over you; he has exalted your adversaries’ power.
LAM 2:18 Cry out from your heart to the Lord, O wall of Daughter Zion! Make your tears flow like a river all day and all night long! Do not rest; do not let your tears stop!
LAM 2:19 Get up! Cry out in the night when the night watches start! Pour out your heart like water before the face of the Lord! Lift up your hands to him for your children’s lives; they are fainting at every street corner.
LAM 2:20 Look, O Lord! Consider! Whom have you ever afflicted like this? Should women eat their offspring, their healthy infants? Should priest and prophet be killed in the Lord’s sanctuary?
LAM 2:21 The young boys and old men lie dead on the ground in the streets. My young women and my young men have fallen by the sword. You killed them when you were angry; you slaughtered them without mercy.
LAM 2:22 As if it were a feast day, you call enemies to terrify me on every side. On the day of the Lord’s anger no one escaped or survived. My enemy has finished off those healthy infants whom I bore and raised.
LAM 3:1 I am the man who has experienced affliction from the rod of his wrath.
LAM 3:2 He drove me into captivity and made me walk in darkness and not light.
LAM 3:3 He repeatedly attacks me, he turns his hand against me all day long.
LAM 3:4 He has made my mortal skin waste away; he has broken my bones.
LAM 3:5 He has besieged and surrounded me with bitter hardship.
LAM 3:6 He has made me reside in deepest darkness like those who died long ago.
LAM 3:7 He has walled me in so that I cannot get out; he has weighted me down with heavy prison chains.
LAM 3:8 Also, when I cry out desperately for help, he has shut out my prayer.
LAM 3:9 He has blocked every road I take with a wall of hewn stones; he has made every path impassable.
LAM 3:10 To me he is like a bear lying in ambush, like a hidden lion stalking its prey.
LAM 3:11 He has obstructed my paths and torn me to pieces; he has made me desolate.
LAM 3:12 He drew his bow and made me the target for his arrow.
LAM 3:13 He shot his arrows into my heart.
LAM 3:14 I have become the laughingstock of all people, their mocking song all day long.
LAM 3:15 He has given me my fill of bitter herbs and made me drunk with bitterness.
LAM 3:16 He ground my teeth in gravel; he trampled me in the dust.
LAM 3:17 I am deprived of peace; I have forgotten what happiness is.
LAM 3:18 So I said, “My endurance has expired; I have lost all hope of deliverance from the Lord.”
LAM 3:19 Remember my impoverished and homeless condition, which is a bitter poison.
LAM 3:20 I continually think about this, and I am depressed.
LAM 3:21 But this I call to mind; therefore I have hope:
LAM 3:22 The Lord’s loyal kindness never ceases; his compassions never end.
LAM 3:23 They are fresh every morning; your faithfulness is abundant!
LAM 3:24 “My portion is the Lord,” I have said to myself, so I will put my hope in him.
LAM 3:25 The Lord is good to those who trust in him, to the one who seeks him.
LAM 3:26 It is good to wait patiently for deliverance from the Lord.
LAM 3:27 It is good for a man to bear the yoke while he is young.
LAM 3:28 Let a person sit alone in silence, when the Lord is disciplining him.
LAM 3:29 Let him bury his face in the dust; perhaps there is hope.
LAM 3:30 Let him offer his cheek to the one who hits him; let him have his fill of insults.
LAM 3:31 For the Lord will not reject us forever.
LAM 3:32 Though he causes us grief, he then has compassion on us according to the abundance of his loyal kindness.
LAM 3:33 For he is not predisposed to afflict or to grieve people.
LAM 3:34 To crush underfoot all the earth’s prisoners,
LAM 3:35 to deprive a person of his rights in the presence of the Most High,
LAM 3:36 to defraud a person in a lawsuit – the Lord does not approve of such things!
LAM 3:37 Whose command was ever fulfilled unless the Lord decreed it?
LAM 3:38 Is it not from the mouth of the Most High that everything comes – both calamity and blessing?
LAM 3:39 Why should any living person complain when punished for his sins?
LAM 3:40 Let us carefully examine our ways, and let us return to the Lord.
LAM 3:41 Let us lift up our hearts and our hands to God in heaven:
LAM 3:42 “We have blatantly rebelled; you have not forgiven.”
LAM 3:43 You shrouded yourself with anger and then pursued us; you killed without mercy.
LAM 3:44 You shrouded yourself with a cloud so that no prayer can get through.
LAM 3:45 You make us like filthy scum in the estimation of the nations.
LAM 3:46 All our enemies have gloated over us;
LAM 3:47 Panic and pitfall have come upon us, devastation and destruction.
LAM 3:48 Streams of tears flow from my eyes because my people are destroyed.
LAM 3:49 Tears flow from my eyes and will not stop; there will be no break
LAM 3:50 until the Lord looks down from heaven and sees what has happened.
LAM 3:51 What my eyes see grieves me – all the suffering of the daughters in my city.
LAM 3:52 For no good reason my enemies hunted me down like a bird.
LAM 3:53 They shut me up in a pit and threw stones at me.
LAM 3:54 The waters closed over my head; I thought I was about to die.
LAM 3:55 I have called on your name, O Lord, from the deepest pit.
LAM 3:56 You heard my plea: “Do not close your ears to my cry for relief!”
LAM 3:57 You came near on the day I called to you; you said, “Do not fear!”
LAM 3:58 O Lord, you championed my cause, you redeemed my life.
LAM 3:59 You have seen the wrong done to me, O Lord; pronounce judgment on my behalf!
LAM 3:60 You have seen all their vengeance, all their plots against me.
LAM 3:61 You have heard their taunts, O Lord, all their plots against me.
LAM 3:62 My assailants revile and conspire against me all day long.
LAM 3:63 Watch them from morning to evening; I am the object of their mocking songs.
LAM 3:64 Pay them back what they deserve, O Lord, according to what they have done.
LAM 3:65 Give them a distraught heart; may your curse be on them!
LAM 3:66 Pursue them in anger and eradicate them from under the Lord’s heaven.
LAM 4:1 Alas! Gold has lost its luster; pure gold loses value. Jewels are scattered on every street corner.
LAM 4:2 The precious sons of Zion were worth their weight in gold – Alas! – but now they are treated like broken clay pots, made by a potter.
LAM 4:3 Even the jackals nurse their young at their breast, but my people are cruel, like ostriches in the desert.
LAM 4:4 The infant’s tongue sticks to the roof of its mouth due to thirst; little children beg for bread, but no one gives them even a morsel.
LAM 4:5 Those who once feasted on delicacies are now starving to death in the streets. Those who grew up wearing expensive clothes are now dying amid garbage.
LAM 4:6 The punishment of my people exceeded that of of Sodom, which was overthrown in a moment with no one to help her.
LAM 4:7 Her consecrated ones were brighter than snow, whiter than milk; their bodies more ruddy than corals, their hair like lapis lazuli.
LAM 4:8 Now their appearance is darker than soot; they are not recognized in the streets. Their skin has shriveled on their bones; it is dried up, like tree bark.
LAM 4:9 Those who died by the sword are better off than those who die of hunger, those who waste away, struck down from lack of food.
LAM 4:10 The hands of tenderhearted women cooked their own children, who became their food, when my people were destroyed.
LAM 4:11 The Lord fully vented his wrath; he poured out his fierce anger. He started a fire in Zion; it consumed her foundations.
LAM 4:12 Neither the kings of the earth nor the people of the lands ever thought that enemy or foe would enter the gates of Jerusalem.
LAM 4:13 But it happened due to the sins of her prophets and the iniquities of her priests, who poured out in her midst the blood of the righteous.
LAM 4:14 They wander blindly through the streets, defiled by the blood they shed, while no one dares to touch their garments.
LAM 4:15 People cry to them, “Turn away! You are unclean! Turn away! Turn away! Don’t touch us!” So they have fled and wander about; but the nations say, “They may not stay here any longer.”
LAM 4:16 The Lord himself has scattered them; he no longer watches over them. They did not honor the priests; they did not show favor to the elders.
LAM 4:17 Our eyes continually failed us as we looked in vain for help. From our watchtowers we watched for a nation that could not rescue us.
LAM 4:18 Our enemies hunted us down at every step so that we could not walk about in our streets. Our end drew near, our days were numbered, for our end had come!
LAM 4:19 Those who pursued us were swifter than eagles in the sky. They chased us over the mountains; they ambushed us in the wilderness.
LAM 4:20 Our very life breath – the Lord’s anointed king – was caught in their traps, of whom we thought, “Under his protection we will survive among the nations.”
LAM 4:21 Rejoice and be glad for now, O people of Edom, who reside in the land of Uz. But the cup of judgment will pass to you also; you will get drunk and take off your clothes.
LAM 4:22 O people of Zion, your punishment will come to an end; he will not prolong your exile. But, O people of Edom, he will punish your sin and reveal your offenses!
LAM 5:1 O Lord, reflect on what has happened to us; consider and look at our disgrace.
LAM 5:2 Our inheritance is turned over to strangers; foreigners now occupy our homes.
LAM 5:3 We have become fatherless orphans; our mothers have become widows.
LAM 5:4 We must pay money for our own water; we must buy our own wood at a steep price.
LAM 5:5 We are pursued – they are breathing down our necks; we are weary and have no rest.
LAM 5:6 We have submitted to Egypt and Assyria in order to buy food to eat.
LAM 5:7 Our forefathers sinned and are dead, but we suffer their punishment.
LAM 5:8 Slaves rule over us; there is no one to rescue us from their power.
LAM 5:9 At the risk of our lives we get our food because robbers lurk in the countryside.
LAM 5:10 Our skin is hot as an oven due to a fever from hunger.
LAM 5:11 They raped women in Zion, virgins in the towns of Judah.
LAM 5:12 Princes were hung by their hands; elders were mistreated.
LAM 5:13 The young men perform menial labor; boys stagger from their labor.
LAM 5:14 The elders are gone from the city gate; the young men have stopped playing their music.
LAM 5:15 Our hearts no longer have any joy; our dancing is turned to mourning.
LAM 5:16 The crown has fallen from our head; woe to us, for we have sinned!
LAM 5:17 Because of this, our hearts are sick; because of these things, we can hardly see through our tears.
LAM 5:18 For wild animals are prowling over Mount Zion, which lies desolate.
LAM 5:19 But you, O Lord, reign forever; your throne endures from generation to generation.
LAM 5:20 Why do you keep on forgetting us? Why do you forsake us so long?
LAM 5:21 Bring us back to yourself, O Lord, so that we may return to you; renew our life as in days before,
LAM 5:22 unless you have utterly rejected us and are angry with us beyond measure.
EZE 1:1 In the thirtieth year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, while I was among the exiles at the Kebar River, the heavens opened and I saw a divine vision.
EZE 1:2 (On the fifth day of the month – it was the fifth year of King Jehoiachin’s exile –
EZE 1:3 the word of the Lord came to the priest Ezekiel the son of Buzi, at the Kebar River in the land of the Babylonians. The hand of the Lord came on him there).
EZE 1:4 As I watched, I noticed a windstorm coming from the north – an enormous cloud, with lightning flashing, such that bright light rimmed it and came from it like glowing amber from the middle of a fire.
EZE 1:5 In the fire were what looked like four living beings. In their appearance they had human form,
EZE 1:6 but each had four faces and four wings.
EZE 1:7 Their legs were straight, but the soles of their feet were like calves’ feet. They gleamed like polished bronze.
EZE 1:8 They had human hands under their wings on their four sides. As for the faces and wings of the four of them,
EZE 1:9 their wings touched each other; they did not turn as they moved, but went straight ahead.
EZE 1:10 Their faces had this appearance: Each of the four had the face of a man, with the face of a lion on the right, the face of an ox on the left and also the face of an eagle.
EZE 1:11 Their wings were spread out above them; each had two wings touching the wings of one of the other beings on either side and two wings covering their bodies.
EZE 1:12 Each moved straight ahead – wherever the spirit would go, they would go, without turning as they went.
EZE 1:13 In the middle of the living beings was something like burning coals of fire or like torches. It moved back and forth among the living beings. It was bright, and lightning was flashing out of the fire.
EZE 1:14 The living beings moved backward and forward as quickly as flashes of lightning.
EZE 1:15 Then I looked, and I saw one wheel on the ground beside each of the four beings.
EZE 1:16 The appearance of the wheels and their construction was like gleaming jasper, and all four wheels looked alike. Their structure was like a wheel within a wheel.
EZE 1:17 When they moved they would go in any of the four directions they faced without turning as they moved.
EZE 1:18 Their rims were high and awesome, and the rims of all four wheels were full of eyes all around.
EZE 1:19 When the living beings moved, the wheels beside them moved; when the living beings rose up from the ground, the wheels rose up too.
EZE 1:20 Wherever the spirit would go, they would go, and the wheels would rise up beside them because the spirit of the living being was in the wheel.
EZE 1:21 When the living beings moved, the wheels moved, and when they stopped moving, the wheels stopped. When they rose up from the ground, the wheels rose up from the ground; the wheels rose up beside them because the spirit of the living being was in the wheel.
EZE 1:22 Over the heads of the living beings was something like a platform, glittering awesomely like ice, stretched out over their heads.
EZE 1:23 Under the platform their wings were stretched out, each toward the other. Each of the beings also had two wings covering its body.
EZE 1:24 When they moved, I heard the sound of their wings – it was like the sound of rushing waters, or the voice of the Almighty, or the tumult of an army. When they stood still, they lowered their wings.
EZE 1:25 Then there was a voice from above the platform over their heads when they stood still.
EZE 1:26 Above the platform over their heads was something like a sapphire shaped like a throne. High above on the throne was a form that appeared to be a man.
EZE 1:27 I saw an amber glow like a fire enclosed all around from his waist up. From his waist down I saw something that looked like fire. There was a brilliant light around it,
EZE 1:28 like the appearance of a rainbow in the clouds after the rain. This was the appearance of the surrounding brilliant light; it looked like the glory of the Lord. When I saw it, I threw myself face down, and I heard a voice speaking.
EZE 2:1 He said to me, “Son of man, stand on your feet and I will speak with you.”
EZE 2:2 As he spoke to me, a wind came into me and stood me on my feet, and I heard the one speaking to me.
EZE 2:3 He said to me, “Son of man, I am sending you to the house of Israel, to rebellious nations who have rebelled against me; both they and their fathers have revolted against me to this very day.
EZE 2:4 The people to whom I am sending you are obstinate and hard-hearted, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says.’
EZE 2:5 And as for them, whether they listen or not – for they are a rebellious house – they will know that a prophet has been among them.
EZE 2:6 But you, son of man, do not fear them, and do not fear their words – even though briers and thorns surround you and you live among scorpions – do not fear their words and do not be terrified of the looks they give you, for they are a rebellious house!
EZE 2:7 You must speak my words to them whether they listen or not, for they are rebellious.
EZE 2:8 As for you, son of man, listen to what I am saying to you: Do not rebel like that rebellious house! Open your mouth and eat what I am giving you.”
EZE 2:9 Then I looked and realized a hand was stretched out to me, and in it was a written scroll.
EZE 2:10 He unrolled it before me, and it had writing on the front and back; written on it were laments, mourning, and woe.
EZE 3:1 He said to me, “Son of man, eat what you see in front of you – eat this scroll – and then go and speak to the house of Israel.”
EZE 3:2 So I opened my mouth and he fed me the scroll.
EZE 3:3 He said to me, “Son of man, feed your stomach and fill your belly with this scroll I am giving to you.” So I ate it, and it was sweet like honey in my mouth.
EZE 3:4 He said to me, “Son of man, go to the house of Israel and speak my words to them.
EZE 3:5 For you are not being sent to a people of unintelligible speech and difficult language, but to the house of Israel –
EZE 3:6 not to many peoples of unintelligible speech and difficult language, whose words you cannot understand – surely if I had sent you to them, they would listen to you!
EZE 3:7 But the house of Israel is unwilling to listen to you, because they are not willing to listen to me, for the whole house of Israel is hard-headed and hard-hearted.
EZE 3:8 “I have made your face adamant to match their faces, and your forehead hard to match their foreheads.
EZE 3:9 I have made your forehead harder than flint – like diamond! Do not fear them or be terrified of the looks they give you, for they are a rebellious house.”
EZE 3:10 And he said to me, “Son of man, take all my words that I speak to you to heart and listen carefully.
EZE 3:11 Go to the exiles, to your fellow countrymen, and speak to them – say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says,’ whether they pay attention or not.”
EZE 3:12 Then a wind lifted me up and I heard a great rumbling sound behind me as the glory of the Lord rose from its place,
EZE 3:13 and the sound of the living beings’ wings brushing against each other, and the sound of the wheels alongside them, a great rumbling sound.
EZE 3:14 A wind lifted me up and carried me away. I went bitterly, my spirit full of fury, and the hand of the Lord rested powerfully on me.
EZE 3:15 I came to the exiles at Tel Abib, who lived by the Kebar River. I sat dumbfounded among them there, where they were living, for seven days.
EZE 3:16 At the end of seven days the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 3:17 “Son of man, I have appointed you a watchman for the house of Israel. Whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you must give them a warning from me.
EZE 3:18 When I say to the wicked, “You will certainly die,” and you do not warn him – you do not speak out to warn the wicked to turn from his wicked deed and wicked lifestyle so that he may live – that wicked person will die for his iniquity, but I will hold you accountable for his death.
EZE 3:19 But as for you, if you warn the wicked and he does not turn from his wicked deed and from his wicked lifestyle, he will die for his iniquity but you will have saved your own life.
EZE 3:20 “When a righteous person turns from his righteousness and commits iniquity, and I set an obstacle before him, he will die. If you have not warned him, he will die for his sin. The righteous deeds he performed will not be considered, but I will hold you accountable for his death.
EZE 3:21 However, if you warn the righteous person not to sin, and he does not sin, he will certainly live because he was warned, and you will have saved your own life.”
EZE 3:22 The hand of the Lord rested on me there, and he said to me, “Get up, go out to the valley, and I will speak with you there.”
EZE 3:23 So I got up and went out to the valley, and the glory of the Lord was standing there, just like the glory I had seen by the Kebar River, and I threw myself face down.
EZE 3:24 Then a wind came into me and stood me on my feet. The Lord spoke to me and said, “Go shut yourself in your house.
EZE 3:25 As for you, son of man, they will put ropes on you and tie you up with them, so you cannot go out among them.
EZE 3:26 I will make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth so that you will be silent and unable to reprove them, for they are a rebellious house.
EZE 3:27 But when I speak with you, I will loosen your tongue and you must say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says.’ Those who listen will listen, but the indifferent will refuse, for they are a rebellious house.
EZE 4:1 “And you, son of man, take a brick and set it in front of you. Inscribe a city on it – Jerusalem.
EZE 4:2 Lay siege to it! Build siege works against it. Erect a siege ramp against it! Post soldiers outside it and station battering rams around it.
EZE 4:3 Then for your part take an iron frying pan and set it up as an iron wall between you and the city. Set your face toward it. It is to be under siege; you are to besiege it. This is a sign for the house of Israel.
EZE 4:4 “Also for your part lie on your left side and place the iniquity of the house of Israel on it. For the number of days you lie on your side you will bear their iniquity.
EZE 4:5 I have determined that the number of the years of their iniquity are to be the number of days for you – 390 days. So bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
EZE 4:6 “When you have completed these days, then lie down a second time, but on your right side, and bear the iniquity of the house of Judah 40 days – I have assigned one day for each year.
EZE 4:7 You must turn your face toward the siege of Jerusalem with your arm bared and prophesy against it.
EZE 4:8 Look here, I will tie you up with ropes, so you cannot turn from one side to the other until you complete the days of your siege.
EZE 4:9 “As for you, take wheat, barley, beans, lentils, millet, and spelt, put them in a single container, and make food from them for yourself. For the same number of days that you lie on your side – 390 days – you will eat it.
EZE 4:10 The food you eat will be eight ounces a day by weight; you must eat it at fixed times.
EZE 4:11 And you must drink water by measure, a pint and a half; you must drink it at fixed times.
EZE 4:12 And you must eat the food like you would a barley cake. You must bake it in front of them over a fire made with dried human excrement.”
EZE 4:13 And the Lord said, “This is how the people of Israel will eat their unclean food among the nations where I will banish them.”
EZE 4:14 And I said, “Ah, sovereign Lord, I have never been ceremonially defiled before. I have never eaten a carcass or an animal torn by wild beasts; from my youth up, unclean meat has never entered my mouth.”
EZE 4:15 So he said to me, “All right then, I will substitute cow’s manure instead of human excrement. You will cook your food over it.”
EZE 4:16 Then he said to me, “Son of man, I am about to remove the bread supply in Jerusalem. They will eat their bread ration anxiously, and they will drink their water ration in terror
EZE 4:17 because they will lack bread and water. Each one will be terrified, and they will rot for their iniquity.
EZE 5:1 “As for you, son of man, take a sharp sword and use it as a barber’s razor. Shave off some of the hair from your head and your beard. Then take scales and divide up the hair you cut off.
EZE 5:2 Burn a third of it in the fire inside the city when the days of your siege are completed. Take a third and slash it with a sword all around the city. Scatter a third to the wind, and I will unleash a sword behind them.
EZE 5:3 But take a few strands of hair from those and tie them in the ends of your garment.
EZE 5:4 Again, take more of them and throw them into the fire, and burn them up. From there a fire will spread to all the house of Israel.
EZE 5:5 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: This is Jerusalem; I placed her in the center of the nations with countries all around her.
EZE 5:6 Then she defied my regulations and my statutes, becoming more wicked than the nations and the countries around her. Indeed, they have rejected my regulations, and they do not follow my statutes.
EZE 5:7 “Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Because you are more arrogant than the nations around you, you have not followed my statutes and have not carried out my regulations. You have not even carried out the regulations of the nations around you!
EZE 5:8 “Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: I – even I – am against you, and I will execute judgment among you while the nations watch.
EZE 5:9 I will do to you what I have never done before and will never do again because of all your abominable practices.
EZE 5:10 Therefore fathers will eat their sons within you, Jerusalem, and sons will eat their fathers. I will execute judgments on you, and I will scatter any survivors to the winds.
EZE 5:11 “Therefore, as surely as I live, says the sovereign Lord, because you defiled my sanctuary with all your detestable idols and with all your abominable practices, I will withdraw; my eye will not pity you, nor will I spare you.
EZE 5:12 A third of your people will die of plague or be overcome by the famine within you. A third of your people will fall by the sword surrounding you, and a third I will scatter to the winds. I will unleash a sword behind them.
EZE 5:13 Then my anger will be fully vented; I will exhaust my rage on them, and I will be appeased. Then they will know that I, the Lord, have spoken in my jealousy when I have fully vented my rage against them.
EZE 5:14 “I will make you desolate and an object of scorn among the nations around you, in the sight of everyone who passes by.
EZE 5:15 You will be an object of scorn and taunting, a prime example of destruction among the nations around you when I execute judgments against you in anger and raging fury. I, the Lord, have spoken!
EZE 5:16 I will shoot against them deadly, destructive arrows of famine, which I will shoot to destroy you. I will prolong a famine on you and will remove the bread supply.
EZE 5:17 I will send famine and wild beasts against you and they will take your children from you. Plague and bloodshed will overwhelm you, and I will bring a sword against you. I, the Lord, have spoken!”
EZE 6:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 6:2 “Son of man, turn toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them:
EZE 6:3 Say, ‘Mountains of Israel, Hear the word of the sovereign Lord! This is what the sovereign Lord says to the mountains and the hills, to the ravines and the valleys: I am bringing a sword against you, and I will destroy your high places.
EZE 6:4 Your altars will be ruined and your incense altars will be broken. I will throw down your slain in front of your idols.
EZE 6:5 I will place the corpses of the people of Israel in front of their idols, and I will scatter your bones around your altars.
EZE 6:6 In all your dwellings, the cities will be laid waste and the high places ruined so that your altars will be laid waste and ruined, your idols will be shattered and demolished, your incense altars will be broken down, and your works wiped out.
EZE 6:7 The slain will fall among you and then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 6:8 “‘But I will spare some of you. Some will escape the sword when you are scattered in foreign lands.
EZE 6:9 Then your survivors will remember me among the nations where they are exiled. They will realize how I was crushed by their unfaithful heart which turned from me and by their eyes which lusted after their idols. They will loathe themselves because of the evil they have done and because of all their abominable practices.
EZE 6:10 They will know that I am the Lord; my threats to bring this catastrophe on them were not empty.’
EZE 6:11 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Clap your hands, stamp your feet, and say, “Ah!” because of all the evil, abominable practices of the house of Israel, for they will fall by the sword, famine, and pestilence.
EZE 6:12 The one far away will die by pestilence, the one close by will fall by the sword, and whoever is left and has escaped these will die by famine. I will fully vent my rage against them.
EZE 6:13 Then you will know that I am the Lord – when their dead lie among their idols around their altars, on every high hill and all the mountaintops, under every green tree and every leafy oak, the places where they have offered fragrant incense to all their idols.
EZE 6:14 I will stretch out my hand against them and make the land a desolate waste from the wilderness to Riblah, in all the places where they live. Then they will know that I am the Lord!”
EZE 7:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 7:2 “You, son of man – this is what the sovereign Lord says to the land of Israel: An end! The end is coming on the four corners of the land!
EZE 7:3 The end is now upon you, and I will release my anger against you; I will judge you according to your behavior, I will hold you accountable for all your abominable practices.
EZE 7:4 My eye will not pity you; I will not spare you. For I will hold you responsible for your behavior, and you will suffer the consequences of your abominable practices. Then you will know that I am the Lord!
EZE 7:5 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: A disaster – a one-of-a-kind disaster – is coming!
EZE 7:6 An end comes – the end comes! It has awakened against you – the end is upon you! Look, it is coming!
EZE 7:7 Doom is coming upon you who live in the land! The time is coming, the day is near. There are sounds of tumult, not shouts of joy, on the mountains.
EZE 7:8 Soon now I will pour out my rage on you; I will fully vent my anger against you. I will judge you according to your behavior. I will hold you accountable for all your abominable practices.
EZE 7:9 My eye will not pity you; I will not spare you. For your behavior I will hold you accountable, and you will suffer the consequences of your abominable practices. Then you will know that it is I, the Lord, who is striking you.
EZE 7:10 “Look, the day! Look, it is coming! Doom has gone out! The staff has budded, pride has blossomed!
EZE 7:11 Violence has grown into a staff that supports wickedness. Not one of them will be left – not from their crowd, not from their wealth, not from their prominence.
EZE 7:12 The time has come; the day has struck! The customer should not rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for divine wrath comes against their whole crowd.
EZE 7:13 The customer will no longer pay the seller while both parties are alive, for the vision against their whole crowd will not be revoked. Each person, for his iniquity, will fail to preserve his life.
EZE 7:14 “They have blown the trumpet and everyone is ready, but no one goes to battle, because my anger is against their whole crowd.
EZE 7:15 The sword is outside; pestilence and famine are inside the house. Whoever is in the open field will die by the sword, and famine and pestilence will consume everyone in the city.
EZE 7:16 Their survivors will escape to the mountains and become like doves of the valleys; all of them will moan – each one for his iniquity.
EZE 7:17 All of their hands will hang limp; their knees will be wet with urine.
EZE 7:18 They will wear sackcloth, terror will cover them; shame will be on all their faces, and all of their heads will be shaved bald.
EZE 7:19 They will discard their silver in the streets, and their gold will be treated like filth. Their silver and gold will not be able to deliver them on the day of the Lord’s fury. They will not satisfy their hunger or fill their stomachs because their wealth was the obstacle leading to their iniquity.
EZE 7:20 They rendered the beauty of his ornaments into pride, and with it they made their abominable images – their detestable idols. Therefore I will render it filthy to them.
EZE 7:21 I will give it to foreigners as loot, to the world’s wicked ones as plunder, and they will desecrate it.
EZE 7:22 I will turn my face away from them and they will desecrate my treasured place. Vandals will enter it and desecrate it.
EZE 7:23 (Make the chain, because the land is full of murder and the city is full of violence.)
EZE 7:24 I will bring the most wicked of the nations and they will take possession of their houses. I will put an end to the arrogance of the strong, and their sanctuaries will be desecrated.
EZE 7:25 Terror is coming! They will seek peace, but find none.
EZE 7:26 Disaster after disaster will come, and one rumor after another. They will seek a vision from a prophet; priestly instruction will disappear, along with counsel from the elders.
EZE 7:27 The king will mourn and the prince will be clothed with shuddering; the hands of the people of the land will tremble. Based on their behavior I will deal with them, and by their standard of justice I will judge them. Then they will know that I am the Lord!”
EZE 8:1 In the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth of the month, as I was sitting in my house with the elders of Judah sitting in front of me, the hand of the sovereign Lord seized me.
EZE 8:2 As I watched, I noticed a form that appeared to be a man. From his waist downward was something like fire, and from his waist upward something like a brightness, like an amber glow.
EZE 8:3 He stretched out the form of a hand and grabbed me by a lock of hair on my head. Then a wind lifted me up between the earth and sky and brought me to Jerusalem by means of divine visions, to the door of the inner gate which faces north where the statue which provokes to jealousy was located.
EZE 8:4 Then I perceived that the glory of the God of Israel was there, as in the vision I had seen earlier in the valley.
EZE 8:5 He said to me, “Son of man, look up toward the north.” So I looked up toward the north, and I noticed to the north of the altar gate was this statue of jealousy at the entrance.
EZE 8:6 He said to me, “Son of man, do you see what they are doing – the great abominations that the people of Israel are practicing here, to drive me far from my sanctuary? But you will see greater abominations than these!”
EZE 8:7 He brought me to the entrance of the court, and as I watched, I noticed a hole in the wall.
EZE 8:8 He said to me, “Son of man, dig into the wall.” So I dug into the wall and discovered a doorway.
EZE 8:9 He said to me, “Go in and see the evil abominations they are practicing here.”
EZE 8:10 So I went in and looked. I noticed every figure of creeping thing and beast – detestable images – and every idol of the house of Israel, engraved on the wall all around.
EZE 8:11 Seventy men from the elders of the house of Israel (with Jaazaniah son of Shaphan standing among them) were standing in front of them, each with a censer in his hand, and fragrant vapors from a cloud of incense were swirling upward.
EZE 8:12 He said to me, “Do you see, son of man, what the elders of the house of Israel are doing in the dark, each in the chamber of his idolatrous images? For they think, ‘The Lord does not see us! The Lord has abandoned the land!’”
EZE 8:13 He said to me, “You will see them practicing even greater abominations!”
EZE 8:14 Then he brought me to the entrance of the north gate of the Lord’s house. I noticed women sitting there weeping for Tammuz.
EZE 8:15 He said to me, “Do you see this, son of man? You will see even greater abominations than these!”
EZE 8:16 Then he brought me to the inner court of the Lord’s house. Right there at the entrance to the Lord’s temple, between the porch and the altar, were about twenty-five men with their backs to the Lord’s temple, facing east – they were worshiping the sun toward the east!
EZE 8:17 He said to me, “Do you see, son of man? Is it a trivial thing that the house of Judah commits these abominations they are practicing here? For they have filled the land with violence and provoked me to anger still further. Look, they are putting the branch to their nose!
EZE 8:18 Therefore I will act with fury! My eye will not pity them nor will I spare them. When they have shouted in my ears, I will not listen to them.”
EZE 9:1 Then he shouted in my ears, “Approach, you who are to visit destruction on the city, each with his destructive weapon in his hand!”
EZE 9:2 Next, I noticed six men coming from the direction of the upper gate which faces north, each with his war club in his hand. Among them was a man dressed in linen with a writing kit at his side. They came and stood beside the bronze altar.
EZE 9:3 Then the glory of the God of Israel went up from the cherub where it had rested to the threshold of the temple. He called to the man dressed in linen who had the writing kit at his side.
EZE 9:4 The Lord said to him, “Go through the city of Jerusalem and put a mark on the foreheads of the people who moan and groan over all the abominations practiced in it.”
EZE 9:5 While I listened, he said to the others, “Go through the city after him and strike people down; do no let your eye pity nor spare anyone!
EZE 9:6 Old men, young men, young women, little children, and women – wipe them out! But do not touch anyone who has the mark. Begin at my sanctuary!” So they began with the elders who were at the front of the temple.
EZE 9:7 He said to them, “Defile the temple and fill the courtyards with corpses. Go!” So they went out and struck people down throughout the city.
EZE 9:8 While they were striking them down, I was left alone, and I threw myself face down and cried out, “Ah, sovereign Lord! Will you destroy the entire remnant of Israel when you pour out your fury on Jerusalem?”
EZE 9:9 He said to me, “The sin of the house of Israel and Judah is extremely great; the land is full of murder, and the city is full of corruption, for they say, ‘The Lord has abandoned the land, and the Lord does not see!’
EZE 9:10 But as for me, my eye will not pity them nor will I spare them; I hereby repay them for what they have done.”
EZE 9:11 Next I noticed the man dressed in linen with the writing kit at his side bringing back word: “I have done just as you commanded me.”
EZE 10:1 As I watched, I saw on the platform above the top of the cherubim something like a sapphire, resembling the shape of a throne, appearing above them.
EZE 10:2 The Lord said to the man dressed in linen, “Go between the wheelwork underneath the cherubim. Fill your hands with burning coals from among the cherubim and scatter them over the city.” He went as I watched.
EZE 10:3 (The cherubim were standing on the south side of the temple when the man went in, and a cloud filled the inner court.)
EZE 10:4 Then the glory of the Lord arose from the cherub and moved to the threshold of the temple. The temple was filled with the cloud while the court was filled with the brightness of the Lord’s glory.
EZE 10:5 The sound of the wings of the cherubim could be heard from the outer court, like the sound of the sovereign God when he speaks.
EZE 10:6 When the Lord commanded the man dressed in linen, “Take fire from within the wheelwork, from among the cherubim,” the man went in and stood by one of the wheels.
EZE 10:7 Then one of the cherubim stretched out his hand toward the fire which was among the cherubim. He took some and put it into the hands of the man dressed in linen, who took it and left.
EZE 10:8 (The cherubim appeared to have the form of human hands under their wings.)
EZE 10:9 As I watched, I noticed four wheels by the cherubim, one wheel beside each cherub; the wheels gleamed like jasper.
EZE 10:10 As for their appearance, all four of them looked the same, something like a wheel within a wheel.
EZE 10:11 When they moved, they would go in any of the four directions they faced without turning as they moved; in the direction the head would turn they would follow without turning as they moved,
EZE 10:12 along with their entire bodies, their backs, their hands, and their wings. The wheels of the four of them were full of eyes all around.
EZE 10:13 As for their wheels, they were called “the wheelwork” as I listened.
EZE 10:14 Each of the cherubim had four faces: The first was the face of a cherub, the second that of a man, the third that of a lion, and the fourth that of an eagle.
EZE 10:15 The cherubim rose up; these were the living beings I saw at the Kebar River.
EZE 10:16 When the cherubim moved, the wheels moved beside them; when the cherubim spread their wings to rise from the ground, the wheels did not move from their side.
EZE 10:17 When the cherubim stood still, the wheels stood still, and when they rose up, the wheels rose up with them, for the spirit of the living beings was in the wheels.
EZE 10:18 Then the glory of the Lord moved away from the threshold of the temple and stopped above the cherubim.
EZE 10:19 The cherubim spread their wings, and they rose up from the earth while I watched (when they went the wheels went alongside them). They stopped at the entrance to the east gate of the Lord’s temple as the glory of the God of Israel hovered above them.
EZE 10:20 These were the living creatures which I saw at the Kebar River underneath the God of Israel; I knew that they were cherubim.
EZE 10:21 Each had four faces; each had four wings and the form of human hands under the wings.
EZE 10:22 As for the form of their faces, they were the faces whose appearance I had seen at the Kebar River. Each one moved straight ahead.
EZE 11:1 A wind lifted me up and brought me to the east gate of the Lord’s temple that faces the east. There, at the entrance of the gate, I noticed twenty-five men. Among them I saw Jaazaniah son of Azzur and Pelatiah son of Benaiah, officials of the people.
EZE 11:2 The Lord said to me, “Son of man, these are the men who plot evil and give wicked advice in this city.
EZE 11:3 They say, ‘The time is not near to build houses; the city is a cooking pot and we are the meat in it.’
EZE 11:4 Therefore, prophesy against them! Prophesy, son of man!”
EZE 11:5 Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon me and said to me, “Say: This is what the Lord says: ‘This is what you are thinking, O house of Israel; I know what goes through your minds.
EZE 11:6 You have killed many people in this city; you have filled its streets with corpses.’
EZE 11:7 Therefore, this is what the sovereign Lord says: ‘The corpses you have dumped in the midst of the city are the meat, and this city is the cooking pot, but I will take you out of it.
EZE 11:8 You fear the sword, so the sword I will bring against you,’ declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 11:9 ‘But I will take you out of the city. And I will hand you over to foreigners. I will execute judgments on you.
EZE 11:10 You will die by the sword; I will judge you at the border of Israel. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 11:11 This city will not be a cooking pot for you, and you will not be meat within it; I will judge you at the border of Israel.
EZE 11:12 Then you will know that I am the Lord, whose statutes you have not followed and whose regulations you have not carried out. Instead you have behaved according to the regulations of the nations around you!’”
EZE 11:13 Now, while I was prophesying, Pelatiah son of Benaiah died. Then I threw myself face down and cried out with a loud voice, “Alas, sovereign Lord! You are completely wiping out the remnant of Israel!”
EZE 11:14 Then the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 11:15 “Son of man, your brothers, your relatives, and the whole house of Israel, all of them are those to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, ‘They have gone far away from the Lord; to us this land has been given as a possession.’
EZE 11:16 “Therefore say: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Although I have removed them far away among the nations and have dispersed them among the countries, I have been a little sanctuary for them among the lands where they have gone.’
EZE 11:17 “Therefore say: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: When I regather you from the peoples and assemble you from the lands where you have been dispersed, I will give you back the country of Israel.’
EZE 11:18 “When they return to it, they will remove from it all its detestable things and all its abominations.
EZE 11:19 I will give them one heart and I will put a new spirit within them; I will remove the hearts of stone from their bodies and I will give them tender hearts,
EZE 11:20 so that they may follow my statutes and observe my regulations and carry them out. Then they will be my people, and I will be their God.
EZE 11:21 But those whose hearts are devoted to detestable things and abominations, I hereby repay them for what they have done, says the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 11:22 Then the cherubim spread their wings with their wheels alongside them while the glory of the God of Israel hovered above them.
EZE 11:23 The glory of the Lord rose up from within the city and stopped over the mountain east of it.
EZE 11:24 Then a wind lifted me up and carried me to the exiles in Babylonia, in the vision given to me by the Spirit of God. Then the vision I had seen went up from me.
EZE 11:25 So I told the exiles everything the Lord had shown me.
EZE 12:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 12:2 “Son of man, you are living in the midst of a rebellious house. They have eyes to see, but do not see, and ears to hear, but do not hear, because they are a rebellious house.
EZE 12:3 “Therefore, son of man, pack up your belongings as if for exile. During the day, while they are watching, pretend to go into exile. Go from where you live to another place. Perhaps they will understand, although they are a rebellious house.
EZE 12:4 Bring out your belongings packed for exile during the day while they are watching. And go out at evening, while they are watching, as if for exile.
EZE 12:5 While they are watching, dig a hole in the wall and carry your belongings out through it.
EZE 12:6 While they are watching, raise your baggage onto your shoulder and carry it out in the dark. You must cover your face so that you cannot see the ground because I have made you an object lesson to the house of Israel.”
EZE 12:7 So I did just as I was commanded. I carried out my belongings packed for exile during the day, and at evening I dug myself a hole through the wall with my hands. I went out in the darkness, carrying my baggage on my shoulder while they watched.
EZE 12:8 The word of the Lord came to me in the morning:
EZE 12:9 “Son of man, has not the house of Israel, that rebellious house, said to you, ‘What are you doing?’
EZE 12:10 Say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: The prince will raise this burden in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel within it.’
EZE 12:11 Say, ‘I am an object lesson for you. Just as I have done, it will be done to them; they will go into exile and captivity.’
EZE 12:12 “The prince who is among them will raise his belongings onto his shoulder in darkness, and will go out. He will dig a hole in the wall to leave through. He will cover his face so that he cannot see the land with his eyes.
EZE 12:13 But I will throw my net over him, and he will be caught in my snare. I will bring him to Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans (but he will not see it), and there he will die.
EZE 12:14 All his retinue – his attendants and his troops – I will scatter to every wind; I will unleash a sword behind them.
EZE 12:15 “Then they will know that I am the Lord when I disperse them among the nations and scatter them among foreign countries.
EZE 12:16 But I will let a small number of them survive the sword, famine, and pestilence, so that they can confess all their abominable practices to the nations where they go. Then they will know that I am the Lord.”
EZE 12:17 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 12:18 “Son of man, eat your bread with trembling, and drink your water with anxious shaking.
EZE 12:19 Then say to the people of the land, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says about the inhabitants of Jerusalem and of the land of Israel: They will eat their bread with anxiety and drink their water in fright, for their land will be stripped bare of all it contains because of the violence of all who live in it.
EZE 12:20 The inhabited towns will be left in ruins and the land will be devastated. Then you will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 12:21 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 12:22 “Son of man, what is this proverb you have in the land of Israel, ‘The days pass slowly, and every vision fails’?
EZE 12:23 Therefore tell them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: I hereby end this proverb; they will not recite it in Israel any longer.’ But say to them, ‘The days are at hand when every vision will be fulfilled.
EZE 12:24 For there will no longer be any false visions or flattering omens amidst the house of Israel.
EZE 12:25 For I, the Lord, will speak. Whatever word I speak will be accomplished. It will not be delayed any longer. Indeed in your days, O rebellious house, I will speak the word and accomplish it, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 12:26 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 12:27 “Take note, son of man, the house of Israel is saying, ‘The vision that he sees is for distant days; he is prophesying about the far future.’
EZE 12:28 Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: None of my words will be delayed any longer! The word I speak will come to pass, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 13:1 Then the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 13:2 “Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel who are now prophesying. Say to the prophets who prophesy from their imagination: ‘Hear the word of the Lord!
EZE 13:3 This is what the sovereign Lord says: Woe to the foolish prophets who follow their own spirit but have seen nothing!
EZE 13:4 Your prophets have become like jackals among the ruins, O Israel.
EZE 13:5 You have not gone up in the breaks in the wall, nor repaired a wall for the house of Israel that it would stand strong in the battle on the day of the Lord.
EZE 13:6 They see delusion and their omens are a lie. They say, “the Lord declares,” though the Lord has not sent them; yet they expect their word to be confirmed.
EZE 13:7 Have you not seen a false vision and announced a lying omen when you say, “the Lord declares,” although I myself never spoke?
EZE 13:8 “‘Therefore, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Because you have spoken false words and forecast delusion, look, I am against you, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 13:9 My hand will be against the prophets who see delusion and announce lying omens. They will not be included in the council of my people, nor be written in the registry of the house of Israel, nor enter the land of Israel. Then you will know that I am the sovereign Lord.
EZE 13:10 “‘This is because they have led my people astray saying, “All is well,” when things are not well. When anyone builds a wall without mortar, they coat it with whitewash.
EZE 13:11 Tell the ones who coat it with whitewash that it will fall. When there is a deluge of rain, hailstones will fall and a violent wind will break out.
EZE 13:12 When the wall has collapsed, people will ask you, “Where is the whitewash you coated it with?”
EZE 13:13 “‘Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: In my rage I will make a violent wind break out. In my anger there will be a deluge of rain and hailstones in destructive fury.
EZE 13:14 I will break down the wall you coated with whitewash and knock it to the ground so that its foundation is exposed. When it falls you will be destroyed beneath it, and you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 13:15 I will vent my rage against the wall, and against those who coated it with whitewash. Then I will say to you, “The wall is no more and those who whitewashed it are no more –
EZE 13:16 those prophets of Israel who would prophesy about Jerusalem and would see visions of peace for it, when there was no peace,” declares the sovereign Lord.’
EZE 13:17 “As for you, son of man, turn toward the daughters of your people who are prophesying from their imagination. Prophesy against them
EZE 13:18 and say ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Woe to those who sew bands on all their wrists and make headbands for heads of every size to entrap people’s lives! Will you entrap my people’s lives, yet preserve your own lives?
EZE 13:19 You have profaned me among my people for handfuls of barley and scraps of bread. You have put to death people who should not die and kept alive those who should not live by your lies to my people, who listen to lies!
EZE 13:20 “‘Therefore, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Take note that I am against your wristbands with which you entrap people’s lives like birds. I will tear them from your arms and will release the people’s lives, which you hunt like birds.
EZE 13:21 I will tear off your headbands and rescue my people from your power; they will no longer be prey in your hands. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 13:22 This is because you have disheartened the righteous person with lies (although I have not grieved him), and because you have encouraged the wicked person not to turn from his evil conduct and preserve his life.
EZE 13:23 Therefore you will no longer see false visions and practice divination. I will rescue my people from your power, and you will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 14:1 Then some men from Israel’s elders came to me and sat down in front of me.
EZE 14:2 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 14:3 “Son of man, these men have erected their idols in their hearts and placed the obstacle leading to their iniquity right before their faces. Should I really allow them to seek me?
EZE 14:4 Therefore speak to them and say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: When any one from the house of Israel erects his idols in his heart and sets the obstacle leading to his iniquity before his face, and then consults a prophet, I the Lord am determined to answer him personally according to the enormity of his idolatry.
EZE 14:5 I will do this in order to capture the hearts of the house of Israel, who have alienated themselves from me on account of all their idols.’
EZE 14:6 “Therefore say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Return! Turn from your idols, and turn your faces away from your abominations.
EZE 14:7 For when anyone from the house of Israel, or the foreigner who lives in Israel, separates himself from me and erects his idols in his heart and sets the obstacle leading to his iniquity before his face, and then consults a prophet to seek something from me, I the Lord am determined to answer him personally.
EZE 14:8 I will set my face against that person and will make him an object lesson and a byword and will cut him off from among my people. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 14:9 “‘As for the prophet, if he is made a fool by being deceived into speaking a prophetic word – I, the Lord, have made a fool of that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand against him and destroy him from among my people Israel.
EZE 14:10 They will bear their punishment; the punishment of the one who sought an oracle will be the same as the punishment of the prophet who gave it
EZE 14:11 so that the house of Israel will no longer go astray from me, nor continue to defile themselves by all their sins. They will be my people and I will be their God, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 14:12 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 14:13 “Son of man, suppose a country sins against me by being unfaithful, and I stretch out my hand against it, cut off its bread supply, cause famine to come on it, and kill both people and animals.
EZE 14:14 Even if these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they would save only their own lives by their righteousness, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 14:15 “Suppose I were to send wild animals through the land and kill its children, leaving it desolate, without travelers due to the wild animals.
EZE 14:16 Even if these three men were in it, as surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, they could not save their own sons or daughters; they would save only their own lives, and the land would become desolate.
EZE 14:17 “Or suppose I were to bring a sword against that land and say, ‘Let a sword pass through the land,’ and I were to kill both people and animals.
EZE 14:18 Even if these three men were in it, as surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, they could not save their own sons or daughters – they would save only their own lives.
EZE 14:19 “Or suppose I were to send a plague into that land, and pour out my rage on it with bloodshed, killing both people and animals.
EZE 14:20 Even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, they could not save their own son or daughter; they would save only their own lives by their righteousness.
EZE 14:21 “For this is what the sovereign Lord says: How much worse will it be when I send my four terrible judgments – sword, famine, wild animals, and plague – to Jerusalem to kill both people and animals!
EZE 14:22 Yet some survivors will be left in it, sons and daughters who will be brought out. They will come out to you, and when you see their behavior and their deeds, you will be consoled about the catastrophe I have brought on Jerusalem – for everything I brought on it.
EZE 14:23 They will console you when you see their behavior and their deeds, because you will know that it was not without reason that I have done everything which I have done in it, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 15:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 15:2 “Son of man, of all the woody branches among the trees of the forest, what happens to the wood of the vine?
EZE 15:3 Can wood be taken from it to make anything useful? Or can anyone make a peg from it to hang things on?
EZE 15:4 No! It is thrown in the fire for fuel; when the fire has burned up both ends of it and it is charred in the middle, will it be useful for anything?
EZE 15:5 Indeed! If it was not made into anything useful when it was whole, how much less can it be made into anything when the fire has burned it up and it is charred?
EZE 15:6 “Therefore, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Like the wood of the vine is among the trees of the forest which I have provided as fuel for the fire – so I will provide the residents of Jerusalem as fuel.
EZE 15:7 I will set my face against them – although they have escaped from the fire, the fire will still consume them! Then you will know that I am the Lord, when I set my face against them.
EZE 15:8 I will make the land desolate because they have acted unfaithfully, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 16:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 16:2 “Son of man, confront Jerusalem with her abominable practices
EZE 16:3 and say, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says to Jerusalem: Your origin and your birth were in the land of the Canaanites; your father was an Amorite and your mother a Hittite.
EZE 16:4 As for your birth, on the day you were born your umbilical cord was not cut, nor were you washed in water; you were certainly not rubbed down with salt, nor wrapped with blankets.
EZE 16:5 No eye took pity on you to do even one of these things for you to spare you; you were thrown out into the open field because you were detested on the day you were born.
EZE 16:6 “‘I passed by you and saw you kicking around helplessly in your blood. I said to you as you lay there in your blood, “Live!” I said to you as you lay there in your blood, “Live!”
EZE 16:7 I made you plentiful like sprouts in a field; you grew tall and came of age so that you could wear jewelry. Your breasts had formed and your hair had grown, but you were still naked and bare.
EZE 16:8 “‘Then I passed by you and watched you, noticing that you had reached the age for love. I spread my cloak over you and covered your nakedness. I swore a solemn oath to you and entered into a marriage covenant with you, declares the sovereign Lord, and you became mine.
EZE 16:9 “‘Then I bathed you in water, washed the blood off you, and anointed you with fragrant oil.
EZE 16:10 I dressed you in embroidered clothing and put fine leather sandals on your feet. I wrapped you with fine linen and covered you with silk.
EZE 16:11 I adorned you with jewelry. I put bracelets on your hands and a necklace around your neck.
EZE 16:12 I put a ring in your nose, earrings on your ears, and a beautiful crown on your head.
EZE 16:13 You were adorned with gold and silver, while your clothing was of fine linen, silk, and embroidery. You ate the finest flour, honey, and olive oil. You became extremely beautiful and attained the position of royalty.
EZE 16:14 Your fame spread among the nations because of your beauty; your beauty was perfect because of the splendor which I bestowed on you, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 16:15 “‘But you trusted in your beauty and capitalized on your fame by becoming a prostitute. You offered your sexual favors to every man who passed by so that your beauty became his.
EZE 16:16 You took some of your clothing and made for yourself decorated high places; you engaged in prostitution on them. You went to him to become his.
EZE 16:17 You also took your beautiful jewelry, made of my gold and my silver I had given to you, and made for yourself male images and engaged in prostitution with them.
EZE 16:18 You took your embroidered clothing and used it to cover them; you offered my olive oil and my incense to them.
EZE 16:19 As for my food that I gave you – the fine flour, olive oil, and honey I fed you – you placed it before them as a soothing aroma. That is exactly what happened, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 16:20 “‘You took your sons and your daughters whom you bore to me and you sacrificed them as food for the idols to eat. As if your prostitution not enough,
EZE 16:21 you slaughtered my children and sacrificed them to the idols.
EZE 16:22 And with all your abominable practices and prostitution you did not remember the days of your youth when you were naked and bare, kicking around in your blood.
EZE 16:23 “‘After all of your evil – “Woe! Woe to you!” declares the sovereign Lord –
EZE 16:24 you built yourself a chamber and put up a pavilion in every public square.
EZE 16:25 At the head of every street you erected your pavilion and you disgraced your beauty when you spread your legs to every passerby and multiplied your promiscuity.
EZE 16:26 You engaged in prostitution with the Egyptians, your sexually aroused neighbors, multiplying your promiscuity and provoking me to anger.
EZE 16:27 So see here, I have stretched out my hand against you and cut off your rations. I have delivered you into the power of those who hate you, the daughters of the Philistines, who were ashamed by your obscene conduct.
EZE 16:28 You engaged in prostitution with the Assyrians because your sexual desires were insatiable; you prostituted yourself with them and yet you were still not satisfied.
EZE 16:29 Then you multiplied your promiscuity to the land of merchants, Babylonia, but you were not satisfied there either.
EZE 16:30 “‘How sick is your heart, declares the sovereign Lord, when you perform all of these acts, the deeds of a bold prostitute.
EZE 16:31 When you built your chamber at the head of every street and put up your pavilion in every public square, you were not like a prostitute, because you scoffed at payment.
EZE 16:32 “‘Adulterous wife, who prefers strangers instead of her own husband!
EZE 16:33 All prostitutes receive payment, but instead you give gifts to every one of your lovers. You bribe them to come to you from all around for your sexual favors!
EZE 16:34 You were different from other prostitutes because no one solicited you. When you gave payment and no payment was given to you, you became the opposite!
EZE 16:35 “‘Therefore O prostitute, hear the word of the Lord:
EZE 16:36 This is what the sovereign Lord says: Because your lust was poured out and your nakedness was uncovered in your prostitution with your lovers, and because of all your detestable idols, and because of the blood of your children you have given to them,
EZE 16:37 therefore, take note: I am about to gather all your lovers whom you enjoyed, both all those you loved and all those you hated. I will gather them against you from all around, and I will expose your nakedness to them, and they will see all your nakedness.
EZE 16:38 I will punish you as an adulteress and murderer deserves. I will avenge your bloody deeds with furious rage.
EZE 16:39 I will give you into their hands and they will destroy your chambers and tear down your pavilions. They will strip you of your clothing and take your beautiful jewelry and leave you naked and bare.
EZE 16:40 They will summon a mob who will stone you and hack you in pieces with their swords.
EZE 16:41 They will burn down your houses and execute judgments on you in front of many women. Thus I will put a stop to your prostitution, and you will no longer give gifts to your clients.
EZE 16:42 I will exhaust my rage on you, and then my fury will turn from you. I will calm down and no longer be angry.
EZE 16:43 “‘Because you did not remember the days of your youth and have enraged me with all these deeds, I hereby repay you for what you have done, declares the sovereign Lord. Have you not engaged in prostitution on top of all your other abominable practices?
EZE 16:44 “‘Observe – everyone who quotes proverbs will quote this proverb about you: “Like mother, like daughter.”
EZE 16:45 You are the daughter of your mother, who detested her husband and her sons, and you are the sister of your sisters who detested their husbands and their sons. Your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite.
EZE 16:46 Your older sister was Samaria, who lived north of you with her daughters, and your younger sister, who lived south of you, was Sodom with her daughters.
EZE 16:47 Have you not copied their behavior and practiced their abominable deeds? In a short time you became even more depraved in all your conduct than they were!
EZE 16:48 As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, your sister Sodom and her daughters never behaved as wickedly as you and your daughters have behaved.
EZE 16:49 “‘See here – this was the iniquity of your sister Sodom: She and her daughters had majesty, abundance of food, and enjoyed carefree ease, but they did not help the poor and needy.
EZE 16:50 They were haughty and practiced abominable deeds before me. Therefore when I saw it I removed them.
EZE 16:51 Samaria has not committed half the sins you have; you have done more abominable deeds than they did. You have made your sisters appear righteous with all the abominable things you have done.
EZE 16:52 So now, bear your disgrace, because you have given your sisters reason to justify their behavior. Because the sins you have committed were more abominable than those of your sisters; they have become more righteous than you. So now, be ashamed and bear the disgrace of making your sisters appear righteous.
EZE 16:53 “‘I will restore their fortunes, the fortunes of Sodom and her daughters, and the fortunes of Samaria and her daughters (along with your fortunes among them),
EZE 16:54 so that you may bear your disgrace and be ashamed of all you have done in consoling them.
EZE 16:55 As for your sisters, Sodom and her daughters will be restored to their former status, Samaria and her daughters will be restored to their former status, and you and your daughters will be restored to your former status.
EZE 16:56 In your days of majesty, was not Sodom your sister a byword in your mouth,
EZE 16:57 before your evil was exposed? Now you have become an object of scorn to the daughters of Aram and all those around her and to the daughters of the Philistines – those all around you who despise you.
EZE 16:58 You must bear your punishment for your obscene conduct and your abominable practices, declares the Lord.
EZE 16:59 “‘For this is what the sovereign Lord says: I will deal with you according to what you have done when you despised your oath by breaking your covenant.
EZE 16:60 Yet I will remember the covenant I made with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish a lasting covenant with you.
EZE 16:61 Then you will remember your conduct, and be ashamed when you receive your older and younger sisters. I will give them to you as daughters, but not on account of my covenant with you.
EZE 16:62 I will establish my covenant with you, and then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 16:63 Then you will remember, be ashamed, and remain silent when I make atonement for all you have done, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 17:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 17:2 “Son of man, offer a riddle, and tell a parable to the house of Israel.
EZE 17:3 Say to them: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘A great eagle with broad wings, long feathers, with full plumage which was multi-hued, came to Lebanon and took the top of the cedar.
EZE 17:4 He plucked off its topmost shoot; he brought it to a land of merchants and planted it in a city of traders.
EZE 17:5 He took one of the seedlings of the land, placed it in a cultivated plot; a shoot by abundant water, like a willow he planted it.
EZE 17:6 It sprouted and became a vine, spreading low to the ground; its branches turning toward him, its roots were under itself. So it became a vine; it produced shoots and sent out branches.
EZE 17:7 “‘There was another great eagle with broad wings and thick plumage. Now this vine twisted its roots toward him and sent its branches toward him to be watered from the soil where it was planted.
EZE 17:8 In a good field, by abundant waters, it was planted to grow branches, bear fruit, and become a beautiful vine.
EZE 17:9 “‘Say to them: This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Will it prosper? Will he not rip out its roots and cause its fruit to rot and wither? All its foliage will wither. No strong arm or large army will be needed to pull it out by its roots.
EZE 17:10 Consider! It is planted, but will it prosper? Will it not wither completely when the east wind blows on it? Will it not wither in the soil where it sprouted?’”
EZE 17:11 Then the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 17:12 “Say to the rebellious house of Israel: ‘Don’t you know what these things mean?’ Say: ‘See here, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took her king and her officials prisoner and brought them to himself in Babylon.
EZE 17:13 He took one from the royal family, made a treaty with him, and put him under oath. He then took the leaders of the land
EZE 17:14 so it would be a lowly kingdom which could not rise on its own but must keep its treaty with him in order to stand.
EZE 17:15 But this one from Israel’s royal family rebelled against the king of Babylon by sending his emissaries to Egypt to obtain horses and a large army. Will he prosper? Will the one doing these things escape? Can he break the covenant and escape?
EZE 17:16 “‘As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, surely in the city of the king who crowned him, whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke – in the middle of Babylon he will die!
EZE 17:17 Pharaoh with his great army and mighty horde will not help him in battle, when siege ramps are erected and siege-walls are built to kill many people.
EZE 17:18 He despised the oath by breaking the covenant. Take note – he gave his promise and did all these things – he will not escape!
EZE 17:19 “‘Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: As surely as I live, I will certainly repay him for despising my oath and breaking my covenant!
EZE 17:20 I will throw my net over him and he will be caught in my snare; I will bring him to Babylon and judge him there because of the unfaithfulness he committed against me.
EZE 17:21 All the choice men among his troops will die by the sword and the survivors will be scattered to every wind. Then you will know that I, the Lord, have spoken!
EZE 17:22 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘I will take a sprig from the lofty top of the cedar and plant it. I will pluck from the top one of its tender twigs; I myself will plant it on a high and lofty mountain.
EZE 17:23 I will plant it on a high mountain of Israel, and it will raise branches and produce fruit and become a beautiful cedar. Every bird will live under it; Every winged creature will live in the shade of its branches.
EZE 17:24 All the trees of the field will know that I am the Lord. I make the high tree low; I raise up the low tree. I make the green tree wither, and I make the dry tree sprout. I, the Lord, have spoken, and I will do it!’”
EZE 18:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 18:2 “What do you mean by quoting this proverb concerning the land of Israel, “‘The fathers eat sour grapes And the children’s teeth become numb?’
EZE 18:3 “As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, you will not quote this proverb in Israel anymore!
EZE 18:4 Indeed! All lives are mine – the life of the father as well as the life of the son is mine. The one who sins will die.
EZE 18:5 “Suppose a man is righteous. He practices what is just and right,
EZE 18:6 does not eat pagan sacrifices on the mountains or pray to the idols of the house of Israel, does not defile his neighbor’s wife, does not have sexual relations with a woman during her period,
EZE 18:7 does not oppress anyone, but gives the debtor back whatever was given in pledge, does not commit robbery, but gives his bread to the hungry and clothes the naked,
EZE 18:8 does not engage in usury or charge interest, but refrains from wrongdoing, promotes true justice between men,
EZE 18:9 and follows my statutes and observes my regulations by carrying them out. That man is righteous; he will certainly live, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 18:10 “Suppose such a man has a violent son who sheds blood and does any of these things mentioned previously
EZE 18:11 (though the father did not do any of them). He eats pagan sacrifices on the mountains, defiles his neighbor’s wife,
EZE 18:12 oppresses the poor and the needy, commits robbery, does not give back what was given in pledge, prays to idols, performs abominable acts,
EZE 18:13 engages in usury and charges interest. Will he live? He will not! Because he has done all these abominable deeds he will certainly die. He will bear the responsibility for his own death.
EZE 18:14 “But suppose he in turn has a son who notices all the sins his father commits, considers them, and does not follow his father’s example.
EZE 18:15 He does not eat pagan sacrifices on the mountains, does not pray to the idols of the house of Israel, does not defile his neighbor’s wife,
EZE 18:16 does not oppress anyone or keep what has been given in pledge, does not commit robbery, gives his food to the hungry, and clothes the naked,
EZE 18:17 refrains from wrongdoing, does not engage in usury or charge interest, carries out my regulations and follows my statutes. He will not die for his father’s iniquity; he will surely live.
EZE 18:18 As for his father, because he practices extortion, robs his brother, and does what is not good among his people, he will die for his iniquity.
EZE 18:19 “Yet you say, ‘Why should the son not suffer for his father’s iniquity?’ When the son does what is just and right, and observes all my statutes and carries them out, he will surely live.
EZE 18:20 The person who sins is the one who will die. A son will not suffer for his father’s iniquity, and a father will not suffer for his son’s iniquity; the righteous person will be judged according to his righteousness, and the wicked person according to his wickedness.
EZE 18:21 “But if the wicked person turns from all the sin he has committed and observes all my statutes and does what is just and right, he will surely live; he will not die.
EZE 18:22 None of the sins he has committed will be held against him; because of the righteousness he has done, he will live.
EZE 18:23 Do I actually delight in the death of the wicked, declares the sovereign Lord? Do I not prefer that he turn from his wicked conduct and live?
EZE 18:24 “But if a righteous man turns away from his righteousness and practices wrongdoing according to all the abominable practices the wicked carry out, will he live? All his righteous acts will not be remembered; because of the unfaithful acts he has done and the sin he has committed, he will die.
EZE 18:25 “Yet you say, ‘The Lord’s conduct is unjust!’ Hear, O house of Israel: Is my conduct unjust? Is it not your conduct that is unjust?
EZE 18:26 When a righteous person turns back from his righteousness and practices wrongdoing, he will die for it; because of the wrongdoing he has done, he will die.
EZE 18:27 When a wicked person turns from the wickedness he has committed and does what is just and right, he will preserve his life.
EZE 18:28 Because he considered and turned from all the sins he had done, he will surely live; he will not die.
EZE 18:29 Yet the house of Israel says, ‘The Lord’s conduct is unjust!’ Is my conduct unjust, O house of Israel? Is it not your conduct that is unjust?
EZE 18:30 “Therefore I will judge each person according to his conduct, O house of Israel, declares the sovereign Lord. Repent and turn from all your wickedness; then it will not be an obstacle leading to iniquity.
EZE 18:31 Throw away all your sins you have committed and fashion yourselves a new heart and a new spirit! Why should you die, O house of Israel?
EZE 18:32 For I take no delight in the death of anyone, declares the sovereign Lord. Repent and live!
EZE 19:1 “And you, sing a lament for the princes of Israel,
EZE 19:2 and say: “‘What a lioness was your mother among the lions! She lay among young lions; she reared her cubs.
EZE 19:3 She reared one of her cubs; he became a young lion. He learned to tear prey; he devoured people.
EZE 19:4 The nations heard about him; he was trapped in their pit. They brought him with hooks to the land of Egypt.
EZE 19:5 “‘When she realized that she waited in vain, her hope was lost. She took another of her cubs and made him a young lion.
EZE 19:6 He walked about among the lions; he became a young lion. He learned to tear prey; he devoured people.
EZE 19:7 He broke down their strongholds and devastated their cities. The land and everything in it was frightened at the sound of his roaring.
EZE 19:8 The nations – the surrounding regions – attacked him. They threw their net over him; he was caught in their pit.
EZE 19:9 They put him in a collar with hooks; they brought him to the king of Babylon; they brought him to prison so that his voice would not be heard any longer on the mountains of Israel.
EZE 19:10 “‘Your mother was like a vine in your vineyard, planted by water. It was fruitful and full of branches because it was well-watered.
EZE 19:11 Its boughs were strong, fit for rulers’ scepters; it reached up into the clouds. It stood out because of its height and its many branches.
EZE 19:12 But it was plucked up in anger; it was thrown down to the ground. The east wind dried up its fruit; its strong branches broke off and withered – a fire consumed them.
EZE 19:13 Now it is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land.
EZE 19:14 A fire has gone out from its branch; it has consumed its shoot and its fruit. No strong branch was left in it, nor a scepter to rule.’ This is a lament song, and has become a lament song.”
EZE 20:1 In the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth of the month, some of the elders of Israel came to seek the Lord, and they sat down in front of me.
EZE 20:2 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 20:3 “Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel, and tell them: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Are you coming to seek me? As surely as I live, I will not allow you to seek me, declares the sovereign Lord.’
EZE 20:4 “Are you willing to pronounce judgment? Are you willing to pronounce judgment, son of man? Then confront them with the abominable practices of their fathers,
EZE 20:5 and say to them: “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: On the day I chose Israel I swore to the descendants of the house of Jacob and made myself known to them in the land of Egypt. I swore to them, “I am the Lord your God.”
EZE 20:6 On that day I swore to bring them out of the land of Egypt to a land which I had picked out for them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the most beautiful of all lands.
EZE 20:7 I said to them, “Each of you must get rid of the detestable idols you keep before you, and do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt; I am the Lord your God.”
EZE 20:8 But they rebelled against me, and refused to listen to me; no one got rid of their detestable idols, nor did they abandon the idols of Egypt. Then I decided to pour out my rage on them and fully vent my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
EZE 20:9 I acted for the sake of my reputation, so that I would not be profaned before the nations among whom they lived, before whom I revealed myself by bringing them out of the land of Egypt.
EZE 20:10 “‘So I brought them out of the land of Egypt and led them to the wilderness.
EZE 20:11 I gave them my statutes and revealed my regulations to them. The one who carries them out will live by them!
EZE 20:12 I also gave them my Sabbaths as a reminder of our relationship, so that they would know that I, the Lord, sanctify them.
EZE 20:13 But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness; they did not follow my statutes and they rejected my regulations (the one who obeys them will live by them), and they utterly desecrated my Sabbaths. So I decided to pour out my rage on them in the wilderness and destroy them.
EZE 20:14 I acted for the sake of my reputation, so that I would not be profaned before the nations in whose sight I had brought them out.
EZE 20:15 I also swore to them in the wilderness that I would not bring them to the land I had given them – a land flowing with milk and honey, the most beautiful of all lands.
EZE 20:16 I did this because they rejected my regulations, did not follow my statutes, and desecrated my Sabbaths; for their hearts followed their idols.
EZE 20:17 Yet I had pity on them and did not destroy them, so I did not make an end of them in the wilderness.
EZE 20:18 “‘But I said to their children in the wilderness, “Do not follow the practices of your fathers; do not observe their regulations, nor defile yourselves with their idols.
EZE 20:19 I am the Lord your God; follow my statutes, observe my regulations, and carry them out.
EZE 20:20 Treat my Sabbaths as holy and they will be a reminder of our relationship, and then you will know that I am the Lord your God.”
EZE 20:21 “‘But the children rebelled against me, did not follow my statutes, did not observe my regulations by carrying them out (the one who obeys them will live by them), and desecrated my Sabbaths. I decided to pour out my rage on them and fully vent my anger against them in the wilderness.
EZE 20:22 But I refrained from doing so, and acted instead for the sake of my reputation, so that I would not be profaned before the nations in whose sight I had brought them out.
EZE 20:23 I also swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them throughout the lands.
EZE 20:24 I did this because they did not observe my regulations, they rejected my statutes, they desecrated my Sabbaths, and their eyes were fixed on their fathers’ idols.
EZE 20:25 I also gave them decrees which were not good and regulations by which they could not live.
EZE 20:26 I declared them to be defiled because of their sacrifices – they caused all their first born to pass through the fire – so that I would devastate them, so that they will know that I am the Lord.’
EZE 20:27 “Therefore, speak to the house of Israel, son of man, and tell them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: In this way too your fathers blasphemed me when they were unfaithful to me.
EZE 20:28 I brought them to the land which I swore to give them, but whenever they saw any high hill or leafy tree, they offered their sacrifices there and presented the offerings that provoke me to anger. They offered their soothing aroma there and poured out their drink offerings.
EZE 20:29 So I said to them, What is this high place you go to?’” (So it is called “High Place” to this day.)
EZE 20:30 “Therefore say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Will you defile yourselves like your fathers and engage in prostitution with detestable idols?
EZE 20:31 When you present your sacrifices – when you make your sons pass through the fire – you defile yourselves with all your idols to this very day. Will I allow you to seek me, O house of Israel? As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, I will not allow you to seek me!
EZE 20:32 “‘What you plan will never happen. You say, “We will be like the nations, like the clans of the lands, who serve gods of wood and stone.”
EZE 20:33 As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, with a powerful hand and an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage, I will be king over you.
EZE 20:34 I will bring you out from the nations, and will gather you from the lands where you are scattered, with a powerful hand and an outstretched arm and with an outpouring of rage!
EZE 20:35 I will bring you into the wilderness of the nations, and there I will enter into judgment with you face to face.
EZE 20:36 Just as I entered into judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 20:37 I will make you pass under the shepherd’s staff, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
EZE 20:38 I will eliminate from among you the rebels and those who revolt against me. I will bring them out from the land where they have been residing, but they will not come to the land of Israel. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 20:39 “‘As for you, O house of Israel, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Each of you go and serve your idols, if you will not listen to me. But my holy name will not be profaned again by your sacrifices and your idols.
EZE 20:40 For there on my holy mountain, the high mountain of Israel, declares the sovereign Lord, all the house of Israel will serve me, all of them in the land. I will accept them there, and there I will seek your contributions and your choice gifts, with all your holy things.
EZE 20:41 When I bring you out from the nations and gather you from the lands where you are scattered, I will accept you along with your soothing aroma. I will display my holiness among you in the sight of the nations.
EZE 20:42 Then you will know that I am the Lord when I bring you to the land of Israel, to the land I swore to give to your fathers.
EZE 20:43 And there you will remember your conduct and all your deeds by which you defiled yourselves. You will despise yourselves because of all the evil deeds you have done.
EZE 20:44 Then you will know that I am the Lord, when I deal with you for the sake of my reputation and not according to your wicked conduct and corrupt deeds, O house of Israel, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 20:45 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 20:46 “Son of man, turn toward the south, and speak out against the south. Prophesy against the open scrub land of the Negev,
EZE 20:47 and say to the scrub land of the Negev, ‘Hear the word of the Lord: This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look here, I am about to start a fire in you, and it will devour every green tree and every dry tree in you. The flaming fire will not be extinguished, and the whole surface of the ground from the Negev to the north will be scorched by it.
EZE 20:48 And everyone will see that I, the Lord, have burned it; it will not be extinguished.’”
EZE 20:49 Then I said, “O sovereign Lord! They are saying of me, ‘Does he not simply speak in eloquent figures of speech?’”
EZE 21:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 21:2 “Son of man, turn toward Jerusalem and speak out against the sanctuaries. Prophesy against the land of Israel
EZE 21:3 and say to them, ‘This is what the Lord says: Look, I am against you. I will draw my sword from its sheath and cut off from you both the righteous and the wicked.
EZE 21:4 Because I will cut off from you both the righteous and the wicked, my sword will go out from its sheath against everyone from the south to the north.
EZE 21:5 Then everyone will know that I am the Lord, who drew my sword from its sheath – it will not be sheathed again!’
EZE 21:6 “And you, son of man, groan with an aching heart and bitterness; groan before their eyes.
EZE 21:7 When they ask you, ‘Why are you groaning?’ you will reply, ‘Because of the report that has come. Every heart will melt with fear and every hand will be limp; everyone will faint and every knee will be wet with urine.’ Pay attention – it is coming and it will happen, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 21:8 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 21:9 “Son of man, prophesy and say: ‘This is what the Lord says: “‘A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also polished.
EZE 21:10 It is sharpened for slaughter, it is polished to flash like lightning! “‘Should we rejoice in the scepter of my son? No! The sword despises every tree!
EZE 21:11 “‘He gave it to be polished, to be grasped in the hand – the sword is sharpened, it is polished – giving it into the hand of the executioner.
EZE 21:12 Cry out and moan, son of man, for it is wielded against my people; against all the princes of Israel. They are delivered up to the sword, along with my people. Therefore, strike your thigh.
EZE 21:13 “‘For testing will come, and what will happen when the scepter, which the sword despises, is no more? declares the sovereign Lord.’
EZE 21:14 “And you, son of man, prophesy, and clap your hands together. Let the sword strike twice, even three times! It is a sword for slaughter, a sword for the great slaughter surrounding them.
EZE 21:15 So hearts melt with fear and many stumble. At all their gates I have stationed the sword for slaughter. Ah! It is made to flash, it is drawn for slaughter!
EZE 21:16 Cut sharply on the right! Swing to the left, wherever your edge is appointed to strike.
EZE 21:17 I too will clap my hands together, I will exhaust my rage; I the Lord have spoken.”
EZE 21:18 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 21:19 “You, son of man, mark out two routes for the king of Babylon’s sword to take; both of them will originate in a single land. Make a signpost and put it at the beginning of the road leading to the city.
EZE 21:20 Mark out the routes for the sword to take: “Rabbah of the Ammonites” and “Judah with Jerusalem in it.”
EZE 21:21 For the king of Babylon stands at the fork in the road at the head of the two routes. He looks for omens: He shakes arrows, he consults idols, he examines animal livers.
EZE 21:22 Into his right hand comes the portent for Jerusalem – to set up battering rams, to give the signal for slaughter, to shout out the battle cry, to set up battering rams against the gates, to erect a siege ramp, to build a siege wall.
EZE 21:23 But those in Jerusalem will view it as a false omen. They have sworn solemn oaths, but the king of Babylon will accuse them of violations in order to seize them.
EZE 21:24 “Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: ‘Because you have brought up your own guilt by uncovering your transgressions and revealing your sins through all your actions, for this reason you will be taken by force.
EZE 21:25 “‘As for you, profane and wicked prince of Israel, whose day has come, the time of final punishment,
EZE 21:26 this is what the sovereign Lord says: Tear off the turban, take off the crown! Things must change! Exalt the lowly, bring down the proud!
EZE 21:27 A total ruin I will make it! It will come to an end when the one arrives to whom I have assigned judgment.’
EZE 21:28 “As for you, son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says concerning the Ammonites and their coming humiliation; say: “‘A sword, a sword drawn for slaughter, polished to consume, to flash like lightning –
EZE 21:29 while seeing false visions for you and reading lying omens for you – to place that sword on the necks of the profane wicked, whose day has come, the time of final punishment.
EZE 21:30 Return it to its sheath! In the place where you were created, in your native land, I will judge you.
EZE 21:31 I will pour out my anger on you; the fire of my fury I will blow on you. I will hand you over to brutal men, who are skilled in destruction.
EZE 21:32 You will become fuel for the fire – your blood will stain the middle of the land; you will no longer be remembered, for I, the Lord, have spoken.’”
EZE 22:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 22:2 “As for you, son of man, are you willing to pronounce judgment, are you willing to pronounce judgment on the bloody city? Then confront her with all her abominable deeds!
EZE 22:3 Then say, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: O city, who spills blood within herself (which brings on her doom), and who makes herself idols (which results in impurity),
EZE 22:4 you are guilty because of the blood you shed and defiled by the idols you made. You have hastened the day of your doom; the end of your years has come. Therefore I will make you an object of scorn to the nations, an object to be mocked by all lands.
EZE 22:5 Those both near and far from you will mock you, you with your bad reputation, full of turmoil.
EZE 22:6 “‘See how each of the princes of Israel living within you has used his authority to shed blood.
EZE 22:7 They have treated father and mother with contempt within you; they have oppressed the foreigner among you; they have wronged the orphan and the widow within you.
EZE 22:8 You have despised my holy things and desecrated my Sabbaths!
EZE 22:9 Slanderous men shed blood within you. Those who live within you eat pagan sacrifices on the mountains; they commit obscene acts among you.
EZE 22:10 They have sex with their father’s wife within you; they violate women during their menstrual period within you.
EZE 22:11 One commits an abominable act with his neighbor’s wife; another obscenely defiles his daughter-in-law; another violates his sister – his father’s daughter – within you.
EZE 22:12 They take bribes within you to shed blood. You engage in usury and charge interest; you extort money from your neighbors. You have forgotten me, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 22:13 “‘See, I strike my hands together at the dishonest profit you have made, and at the bloodshed they have done among you.
EZE 22:14 Can your heart endure, or can your hands be strong when I deal with you? I, the Lord, have spoken, and I will do it!
EZE 22:15 I will scatter you among the nations and disperse you among various countries; I will remove your impurity from you.
EZE 22:16 You will be profaned within yourself in the sight of the nations; then you will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 22:17 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 22:18 “Son of man, the house of Israel has become slag to me. All of them are like bronze, tin, iron, and lead in the furnace; they are the worthless slag of silver.
EZE 22:19 Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: ‘Because all of you have become slag, look out! – I am about to gather you in the middle of Jerusalem.
EZE 22:20 As silver, bronze, iron, lead, and tin are gathered in a furnace so that the fire can melt them, so I will gather you in my anger and in my rage. I will deposit you there and melt you.
EZE 22:21 I will gather you and blow on you with the fire of my fury, and you will be melted in it.
EZE 22:22 As silver is melted in a furnace, so you will be melted in it, and you will know that I, the Lord, have poured out my anger on you.’”
EZE 22:23 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 22:24 “Son of man, say to her: ‘You are a land that receives no rain or showers in the day of my anger.’
EZE 22:25 Her princes within her are like a roaring lion tearing its prey; they have devoured lives. They take away riches and valuable things; they have made many women widows within it.
EZE 22:26 Her priests abuse my law and have desecrated my holy things. They do not distinguish between the holy and the profane, or recognize any distinction between the unclean and the clean. They ignore my Sabbaths and I am profaned in their midst.
EZE 22:27 Her officials are like wolves in her midst rending their prey – shedding blood and destroying lives – so they can get dishonest profit.
EZE 22:28 Her prophets coat their messages with whitewash. They see false visions and announce lying omens for them, saying, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says,’ when the Lord has not spoken.
EZE 22:29 The people of the land have practiced extortion and committed robbery. They have wronged the poor and needy; they have oppressed the foreigner who lives among them and denied them justice.
EZE 22:30 “I looked for a man from among them who would repair the wall and stand in the gap before me on behalf of the land, so that I would not destroy it, but I found no one.
EZE 22:31 So I have poured my anger on them, and destroyed them with the fire of my fury. I hereby repay them for what they have done, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 23:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 23:2 “Son of man, there were two women who were daughters of the same mother.
EZE 23:3 They engaged in prostitution in Egypt; in their youth they engaged in prostitution. Their breasts were squeezed there; lovers fondled their virgin nipples there.
EZE 23:4 Oholah was the name of the older and Oholibah the name of her younger sister. They became mine, and gave birth to sons and daughters. Oholah is Samaria and Oholibah is Jerusalem.
EZE 23:5 “Oholah engaged in prostitution while she was mine. She lusted after her lovers, the Assyrians – warriors
EZE 23:6 clothed in blue, governors and officials, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding on horses.
EZE 23:7 She bestowed her sexual favors on them; all of them were the choicest young men of Assyria. She defiled herself with all whom she desired – with all their idols.
EZE 23:8 She did not abandon the prostitution she had practiced in Egypt; for in her youth men had sex with her, fondled her virgin breasts, and ravished her.
EZE 23:9 Therefore I handed her over to her lovers, the Assyrians for whom she lusted.
EZE 23:10 They exposed her nakedness, seized her sons and daughters, and killed her with the sword. She became notorious among women, and they executed judgments against her.
EZE 23:11 “Her sister Oholibah watched this, but she became more corrupt in her lust than her sister had been, and her acts of prostitution were more numerous than those of her sister.
EZE 23:12 She lusted after the Assyrians – governors and officials, warriors in full armor, horsemen riding on horses, all of them desirable young men.
EZE 23:13 I saw that she was defiled; both of them followed the same path.
EZE 23:14 But she increased her prostitution. She saw men carved on the wall, images of the Chaldeans carved in bright red,
EZE 23:15 wearing belts on their waists and flowing turbans on their heads, all of them looking like officers, the image of Babylonians whose native land is Chaldea.
EZE 23:16 When she saw them, she lusted after them and sent messengers to them in Chaldea.
EZE 23:17 The Babylonians crawled into bed with her. They defiled her with their lust; after she was defiled by them, she became disgusted with them.
EZE 23:18 When she lustfully exposed her nakedness, I was disgusted with her, just as I had been disgusted with her sister.
EZE 23:19 Yet she increased her prostitution, remembering the days of her youth when she engaged in prostitution in the land of Egypt.
EZE 23:20 She lusted after their genitals – as large as those of donkeys, and their seminal emission was as strong as that of stallions.
EZE 23:21 This is how you assessed the obscene conduct of your youth, when the Egyptians fondled your nipples and squeezed your young breasts.
EZE 23:22 “Therefore, Oholibah, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look here, I am about to stir up against you the lovers with whom you were disgusted; I will bring them against you from every side:
EZE 23:23 the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them, desirable young men, all of them governors and officials, officers and nobles, all of them riding on horses.
EZE 23:24 They will attack you with weapons, chariots, wagons, and with a huge army; they will array themselves against you on every side with large shields, small shields, and helmets. I will assign them the task of judgment; they will punish you according to their laws.
EZE 23:25 I will direct my jealous anger against you, and they will deal with you in rage. They will cut off your nose and your ears, and your survivors will die by the sword. They will seize your sons and daughters, and your survivors will be consumed by fire.
EZE 23:26 They will strip your clothes off you and take away your beautiful jewelry.
EZE 23:27 So I will put an end to your obscene conduct and your prostitution which you have practiced in the land of Egypt. You will not seek their help or remember Egypt anymore.
EZE 23:28 “For this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look here, I am about to deliver you over to those whom you hate, to those with whom you were disgusted.
EZE 23:29 They will treat you with hatred, take away all you have labored for, and leave you naked and bare. Your nakedness will be exposed, just as when you engaged in prostitution and obscene conduct.
EZE 23:30 I will do these things to you because you engaged in prostitution with the nations, polluting yourself with their idols.
EZE 23:31 You have followed the ways of your sister, so I will place her cup of judgment in your hand.
EZE 23:32 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: “You will drink your sister’s deep and wide cup; you will be scorned and derided, for it holds a great deal.
EZE 23:33 You will be overcome by drunkenness and sorrow. The cup of your sister Samaria is a cup of horror and desolation.
EZE 23:34 You will drain it dry, gnaw its pieces, and tear out your breasts, for I have spoken, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 23:35 “Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Because you have forgotten me and completely disregarded me, you must bear now the punishment for your obscene conduct and prostitution.”
EZE 23:36 The Lord said to me: “Son of man, are you willing to pronounce judgment on Oholah and Oholibah? Then declare to them their abominable deeds!
EZE 23:37 For they have committed adultery and blood is on their hands. They have committed adultery with their idols, and their sons, whom they bore to me, they have passed through the fire as food to their idols.
EZE 23:38 Moreover, they have done this to me: In the very same day they desecrated my sanctuary and profaned my Sabbaths.
EZE 23:39 On the same day they slaughtered their sons for their idols, they came to my sanctuary to desecrate it. This is what they have done in the middle of my house.
EZE 23:40 “They even sent for men from far away; when the messenger arrived, those men set out. For them you bathed, painted your eyes, and decorated yourself with jewelry.
EZE 23:41 You sat on a magnificent couch, with a table arranged in front of it where you placed my incense and my olive oil.
EZE 23:42 The sound of a carefree crowd accompanied her, including all kinds of men; even Sabeans were brought from the desert. The sisters put bracelets on their wrists and beautiful crowns on their heads.
EZE 23:43 Then I said about the one worn out by adultery, ‘Now they will commit immoral acts with her.’
EZE 23:44 They had sex with her as one does with a prostitute. In this way they had sex with Oholah and Oholibah, promiscuous women.
EZE 23:45 But upright men will punish them appropriately for their adultery and bloodshed, because they are adulteresses and blood is on their hands.
EZE 23:46 “For this is what the sovereign Lord says: Bring up an army against them and subject them to terror and plunder.
EZE 23:47 That army will pelt them with stones and slash them with their swords; they will kill their sons and daughters and burn their houses.
EZE 23:48 I will put an end to the obscene conduct in the land; all the women will learn a lesson from this and not engage in obscene conduct.
EZE 23:49 They will repay you for your obscene conduct, and you will be punished for idol worship. Then you will know that I am the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 24:1 The word of the Lord came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month :
EZE 24:2 “Son of man, write down the name of this day, this very day. The king of Babylon has laid siege to Jerusalem this very day.
EZE 24:3 Recite a proverb to this rebellious house and say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Set on the pot, set it on, pour water in it too;
EZE 24:4 add the pieces of meat to it, every good piece, the thigh and the shoulder; fill it with choice bones.
EZE 24:5 Take the choice bone of the flock, heap up bones under it; boil rapidly, and boil its bones in it.
EZE 24:6 “‘Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Woe to the city of bloodshed, the pot whose rot is in it, whose rot has not been removed from it! Empty it piece by piece. No lot has fallen on it.
EZE 24:7 For her blood was in it; she poured it on an exposed rock; she did not pour it on the ground to cover it up with dust.
EZE 24:8 To arouse anger, to take vengeance, I have placed her blood on an exposed rock so that it cannot be covered up.
EZE 24:9 “‘Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Woe to the city of bloodshed! I will also make the pile high.
EZE 24:10 Pile up the bones, kindle the fire; cook the meat well, mix in the spices, let the bones be charred.
EZE 24:11 Set the empty pot on the coals, until it becomes hot and its copper glows, until its uncleanness melts within it and its rot is consumed.
EZE 24:12 It has tried my patience; yet its thick rot is not removed from it. Subject its rot to the fire!
EZE 24:13 You mix uncleanness with obscene conduct. I tried to cleanse you, but you are not clean. You will not be cleansed from your uncleanness until I have exhausted my anger on you.
EZE 24:14 “‘I the Lord have spoken; judgment is coming and I will act! I will not relent, or show pity, or be sorry! I will judge you according to your conduct and your deeds, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 24:15 The word of Lord came to me:
EZE 24:16 “Son of man, realize that I am about to take the delight of your eyes away from you with a jolt, but you must not mourn or weep or shed tears.
EZE 24:17 Groan in silence for the dead, but do not perform mourning rites. Bind on your turban and put your sandals on your feet. Do not cover your lip and do not eat food brought by others.”
EZE 24:18 So I spoke to the people in the morning, and my wife died in the evening. In the morning I acted just as I was commanded.
EZE 24:19 Then the people said to me, “Will you not tell us what these things you are doing mean for us?”
EZE 24:20 So I said to them: “The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 24:21 Say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Realize I am about to desecrate my sanctuary – the source of your confident pride, the object in which your eyes delight, and your life’s passion. Your very own sons and daughters whom you have left behind will die by the sword.
EZE 24:22 Then you will do as I have done: You will not cover your lip or eat food brought by others.
EZE 24:23 Your turbans will be on your heads and your sandals on your feet; you will not mourn or weep, but you will rot for your iniquities and groan among yourselves.
EZE 24:24 Ezekiel will be an object lesson for you; you will do all that he has done. When it happens, then you will know that I am the sovereign Lord.’
EZE 24:25 “And you, son of man, this is what will happen on the day I take from them their stronghold – their beautiful source of joy, the object in which their eyes delight, and the main concern of their lives, as well as their sons and daughters:
EZE 24:26 On that day a fugitive will come to you to report the news.
EZE 24:27 On that day you will be able to speak again; you will talk with the fugitive and be silent no longer. You will be an object lesson for them, and they will know that I am the Lord.”
EZE 25:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 25:2 “Son of man, turn toward the Ammonites and prophesy against them.
EZE 25:3 Say to the Ammonites, ‘Hear the word of the sovereign Lord: This is what the sovereign Lord says: You said “Aha!” about my sanctuary when it was desecrated, about the land of Israel when it was made desolate, and about the house of Judah when they went into exile.
EZE 25:4 So take note, I am about to make you slaves of the tribes of the east. They will make camps among you and pitch their tents among you. They will eat your fruit and drink your milk.
EZE 25:5 I will make Rabbah a pasture for camels and Ammon a resting place for sheep. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 25:6 For this is what the sovereign Lord says: Because you clapped your hands, stamped your feet, and rejoiced with intense scorn over the land of Israel,
EZE 25:7 take note, I have stretched out my hand against you, and I will hand you over as plunder to the nations. I will cut you off from the peoples and make you perish from the lands. I will destroy you; then you will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 25:8 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: ‘Moab and Seir say, “Look, the house of Judah is like all the other nations.”
EZE 25:9 So look, I am about to open up Moab’s flank, eliminating the cities, including its frontier cities, the beauty of the land – Beth Jeshimoth, Baal Meon, and Kiriathaim.
EZE 25:10 I will hand it over, along with the Ammonites, to the tribes of the east, so that the Ammonites will no longer be remembered among the nations.
EZE 25:11 I will execute judgments against Moab. Then they will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 25:12 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: ‘Edom has taken vengeance against the house of Judah; they have made themselves fully culpable by taking vengeance on them.
EZE 25:13 So this is what the sovereign Lord says: I will stretch out my hand against Edom, and I will kill the people and animals within her, and I will make her desolate; from Teman to Dedan they will die by the sword.
EZE 25:14 I will exact my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel. They will carry out in Edom my anger and rage; they will experience my vengeance, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 25:15 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: ‘The Philistines have exacted merciless revenge, showing intense scorn in their effort to destroy Judah with unrelenting hostility.
EZE 25:16 So this is what the sovereign Lord says: Take note, I am about to stretch out my hand against the Philistines. I will kill the Cherethites and destroy those who remain on the seacoast.
EZE 25:17 I will exact great vengeance upon them with angry rebukes. Then they will know that I am the Lord, when I exact my vengeance upon them.’”
EZE 26:1 In the eleventh year, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 26:2 “Son of man, because Tyre has said about Jerusalem, ‘Aha, the gateway of the peoples is broken; it has swung open to me. I will become rich, now that she has been destroyed,’
EZE 26:3 therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am against you, O Tyre! I will bring up many nations against you, as the sea brings up its waves.
EZE 26:4 They will destroy the walls of Tyre and break down her towers. I will scrape her soil from her and make her a bare rock.
EZE 26:5 She will be a place where fishing nets are spread, surrounded by the sea. For I have spoken, declares the sovereign Lord. She will become plunder for the nations,
EZE 26:6 and her daughters who are in the field will be slaughtered by the sword. Then they will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 26:7 “For this is what the sovereign Lord says: Take note that I am about to bring King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, king of kings, against Tyre from the north, with horses, chariots, and horsemen, an army and hordes of people.
EZE 26:8 He will kill your daughters in the field with the sword. He will build a siege wall against you, erect a siege ramp against you, and raise a great shield against you.
EZE 26:9 He will direct the blows of his battering rams against your walls and tear down your towers with his weapons.
EZE 26:10 He will cover you with the dust kicked up by his many horses. Your walls will shake from the noise of the horsemen, wheels, and chariots when he enters your gates like those who invade through a city’s broken walls.
EZE 26:11 With his horses’ hoofs he will trample all your streets. He will kill your people with the sword, and your strong pillars will tumble down to the ground.
EZE 26:12 They will steal your wealth and loot your merchandise. They will tear down your walls and destroy your luxurious homes. Your stones, your trees, and your soil he will throw into the water.
EZE 26:13 I will silence the noise of your songs; the sound of your harps will be heard no more.
EZE 26:14 I will make you a bare rock; you will be a place where fishing nets are spread. You will never be built again, for I, the Lord, have spoken, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 26:15 “This is what the sovereign Lord says to Tyre: Oh, how the coastlands will shake at the sound of your fall, when the wounded groan, at the massive slaughter in your midst!
EZE 26:16 All the princes of the sea will vacate their thrones. They will remove their robes and strip off their embroidered clothes; they will clothe themselves with trembling. They will sit on the ground; they will tremble continually and be shocked at what has happened to you.
EZE 26:17 They will sing this lament over you: “‘How you have perished – you have vanished from the seas, O renowned city, once mighty in the sea, she and her inhabitants, who spread their terror!
EZE 26:18 Now the coastlands will tremble on the day of your fall; the coastlands by the sea will be terrified by your passing.’
EZE 26:19 “For this is what the sovereign Lord says: When I make you desolate like the uninhabited cities, when I bring up the deep over you and the surging waters overwhelm you,
EZE 26:20 then I will bring you down to bygone people, to be with those who descend to the pit. I will make you live in the lower parts of the earth, among the primeval ruins, with those who descend to the pit, so that you will not be inhabited or stand in the land of the living.
EZE 26:21 I will bring terrors on you, and you will be no more! Though you are sought after, you will never be found again, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 27:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 27:2 “You, son of man, sing a lament for Tyre.
EZE 27:3 Say to Tyre, who sits at the entrance of the sea, merchant to the peoples on many coasts, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘O Tyre, you have said, “I am perfectly beautiful.”
EZE 27:4 Your borders are in the heart of the seas; your builders have perfected your beauty.
EZE 27:5 They crafted all your planks out of fir trees from Senir; they took a cedar from Lebanon to make your mast.
EZE 27:6 They made your oars from oaks of Bashan; they made your deck with cypresses from the Kittean isles.
EZE 27:7 Fine linen from Egypt, woven with patterns, was used for your sail to serve as your banner; blue and purple from the coastlands of Elishah was used for your deck’s awning.
EZE 27:8 The leaders of Sidon and Arvad were your rowers; your skilled men, O Tyre, were your captains.
EZE 27:9 The elders of Gebal and her skilled men were within you, mending cracks; all the ships of the sea and their mariners were within you to trade for your merchandise.
EZE 27:10 Men of Persia, Lud, and Put were in your army, men of war. They hung shield and helmet on you; they gave you your splendor.
EZE 27:11 The Arvadites joined your army on your walls all around, and the Gammadites were in your towers. They hung their quivers on your walls all around; they perfected your beauty.
EZE 27:12 “‘Tarshish was your trade partner because of your abundant wealth; they exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your products.
EZE 27:13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech were your clients; they exchanged slaves and bronze items for your merchandise.
EZE 27:14 Beth Togarmah exchanged horses, chargers, and mules for your products.
EZE 27:15 The Dedanites were your clients. Many coastlands were your customers; they paid you with ivory tusks and ebony.
EZE 27:16 Edom was your trade partner because of the abundance of your goods; they exchanged turquoise, purple, embroidered work, fine linen, coral, and rubies for your products.
EZE 27:17 Judah and the land of Israel were your clients; they traded wheat from Minnith, millet, honey, olive oil, and balm for your merchandise.
EZE 27:18 Damascus was your trade partner because of the abundance of your goods and of all your wealth: wine from Helbon, white wool from Zahar,
EZE 27:19 and casks of wine from Izal they exchanged for your products. Wrought iron, cassia, and sweet cane were among your merchandise.
EZE 27:20 Dedan was your client in saddlecloths for riding.
EZE 27:21 Arabia and all the princes of Kedar were your trade partners; for lambs, rams, and goats they traded with you.
EZE 27:22 The merchants of Sheba and Raamah engaged in trade with you; they traded the best kinds of spices along with precious stones and gold for your products.
EZE 27:23 Haran, Kanneh, Eden, merchants from Sheba, Asshur, and Kilmad were your clients.
EZE 27:24 They traded with you choice garments, purple clothes and embroidered work, and multicolored carpets, bound and reinforced with cords; these were among your merchandise.
EZE 27:25 The ships of Tarshish were the transports for your merchandise. “‘So you were filled and weighed down in the heart of the seas.
EZE 27:26 Your rowers have brought you into surging waters. The east wind has wrecked you in the heart of the seas.
EZE 27:27 Your wealth, products, and merchandise, your sailors and captains, your ship’s carpenters, your merchants, and all your fighting men within you, along with all your crew who are in you, will fall into the heart of the seas on the day of your downfall.
EZE 27:28 At the sound of your captains’ cry the waves will surge;
EZE 27:29 They will descend from their ships – all who handle the oar, the sailors and all the sea captains – they will stand on the land.
EZE 27:30 They will lament loudly over you and cry bitterly. They will throw dust on their heads and roll in the ashes;
EZE 27:31 they will tear out their hair because of you and put on sackcloth, and they will weep bitterly over you with intense mourning.
EZE 27:32 As they wail they will lament over you, chanting: “Who was like Tyre, like a tower in the midst of the sea?”
EZE 27:33 When your products went out from the seas, you satisfied many peoples; with the abundance of your wealth and merchandise you enriched the kings of the earth.
EZE 27:34 Now you are wrecked by the seas, in the depths of the waters; your merchandise and all your company have sunk along with you.
EZE 27:35 All the inhabitants of the coastlands are shocked at you, and their kings are horribly afraid – their faces are troubled.
EZE 27:36 The traders among the peoples hiss at you; you have become a horror, and will be no more.’”
EZE 28:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 28:2 “Son of man, say to the prince of Tyre, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Your heart is proud and you said, “I am a god; I sit in the seat of gods, in the heart of the seas” – yet you are a man and not a god, though you think you are godlike.
EZE 28:3 Look, you are wiser than Daniel; no secret is hidden from you.
EZE 28:4 By your wisdom and understanding you have gained wealth for yourself; you have amassed gold and silver in your treasuries.
EZE 28:5 By your great skill in trade you have increased your wealth, and your heart is proud because of your wealth.
EZE 28:6 “‘Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Because you think you are godlike,
EZE 28:7 I am about to bring foreigners against you, the most terrifying of nations. They will draw their swords against the grandeur made by your wisdom, and they will defile your splendor.
EZE 28:8 They will bring you down to the pit, and you will die violently in the heart of the seas.
EZE 28:9 Will you still say, “I am a god,” before the one who kills you – though you are a man and not a god – when you are in the power of those who wound you?
EZE 28:10 You will die the death of the uncircumcised by the hand of foreigners; for I have spoken, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 28:11 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 28:12 “Son of man, sing a lament for the king of Tyre, and say to him, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘You were the sealer of perfection, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.
EZE 28:13 You were in Eden, the garden of God. Every precious stone was your covering, the ruby, topaz, and emerald, the chrysolite, onyx, and jasper, the sapphire, turquoise, and beryl; your settings and mounts were made of gold. On the day you were created they were prepared.
EZE 28:14 I placed you there with an anointed guardian cherub; you were on the holy mountain of God; you walked about amidst fiery stones.
EZE 28:15 You were blameless in your behavior from the day you were created, until sin was discovered in you.
EZE 28:16 In the abundance of your trade you were filled with violence, and you sinned; so I defiled you and banished you from the mountain of God – the guardian cherub expelled you from the midst of the stones of fire.
EZE 28:17 Your heart was proud because of your beauty; you corrupted your wisdom on account of your splendor. I threw you down to the ground; I placed you before kings, that they might see you.
EZE 28:18 By the multitude of your iniquities, through the sinfulness of your trade, you desecrated your sanctuaries. So I drew fire out from within you; it consumed you, and I turned you to ashes on the earth before the eyes of all who saw you.
EZE 28:19 All who know you among the peoples are shocked at you; you have become terrified and will be no more.’”
EZE 28:20 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 28:21 “Son of man, turn toward Sidon and prophesy against it.
EZE 28:22 Say, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Look, I am against you, Sidon, and I will magnify myself in your midst. Then they will know that I am the Lord when I execute judgments on her and reveal my sovereign power in her.
EZE 28:23 I will send a plague into the city and bloodshed into its streets; the slain will fall within it, by the sword that attacks it from every side. Then they will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 28:24 “‘No longer will Israel suffer from the sharp briers or painful thorns of all who surround and scorn them. Then they will know that I am the sovereign Lord.
EZE 28:25 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: When I regather the house of Israel from the peoples where they are dispersed, I will reveal my sovereign power over them in the sight of the nations, and they will live in their land that I gave to my servant Jacob.
EZE 28:26 They will live securely in it; they will build houses and plant vineyards. They will live securely when I execute my judgments on all those who scorn them and surround them. Then they will know that I am the Lord their God.’”
EZE 29:1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the twelfth day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 29:2 “Son of man, turn toward Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him and against all Egypt.
EZE 29:3 Tell them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Look, I am against you, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great monster lying in the midst of its waterways, who has said, “My Nile is my own, I made it for myself.”
EZE 29:4 I will put hooks in your jaws and stick the fish of your waterways to your scales. I will haul you up from the midst of your waterways, and all the fish of your waterways will stick to your scales.
EZE 29:5 I will leave you in the wilderness, you and all the fish of your waterways; you will fall in the open field and will not be gathered up or collected. I have given you as food to the beasts of the earth and the birds of the skies.
EZE 29:6 Then all those living in Egypt will know that I am the Lord because they were a reed staff for the house of Israel;
EZE 29:7 when they grasped you with their hand, you broke and tore their shoulders, and when they leaned on you, you splintered and caused their legs to be unsteady.
EZE 29:8 “‘Therefore, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am about to bring a sword against you, and I will kill every person and every animal.
EZE 29:9 The land of Egypt will become a desolate ruin. Then they will know that I am the Lord. Because he said, “The Nile is mine and I made it,”
EZE 29:10 I am against you and your waterways. I will turn the land of Egypt into an utter desolate ruin from Migdol to Syene, as far as the border with Ethiopia.
EZE 29:11 No human foot will pass through it, and no animal’s foot will pass through it; it will be uninhabited for forty years.
EZE 29:12 I will turn the land of Egypt into a desolation in the midst of desolate lands; for forty years her cities will lie desolate in the midst of ruined cities. I will scatter Egypt among the nations and disperse them among foreign countries.
EZE 29:13 “‘For this is what the sovereign Lord says: At the end of forty years I will gather Egypt from the peoples where they were scattered.
EZE 29:14 I will restore the fortunes of Egypt, and will bring them back to the land of Pathros, to the land of their origin; there they will be an insignificant kingdom.
EZE 29:15 It will be the most insignificant of the kingdoms; it will never again exalt itself over the nations. I will make them so small that they will not rule over the nations.
EZE 29:16 It will never again be Israel’s source of confidence, but a reminder of how they sinned by turning to Egypt for help. Then they will know that I am the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 29:17 In the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 29:18 “Son of man, King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon made his army labor hard against Tyre. Every head was rubbed bald and every shoulder rubbed bare; yet he and his army received no wages from Tyre for the work he carried out against it.
EZE 29:19 Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am about to give the land of Egypt to King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon. He will carry off her wealth, capture her loot, and seize her plunder; it will be his army’s wages.
EZE 29:20 I have given him the land of Egypt as his compensation for attacking Tyre , because they did it for me, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 29:21 On that day I will make Israel powerful, and I will give you the right to be heard among them. Then they will know that I am the Lord.”
EZE 30:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 30:2 “Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Wail, “Alas, the day is here!”
EZE 30:3 For the day is near, the day of the Lord is near; it will be a day of storm clouds, it will be a time of judgment for the nations.
EZE 30:4 A sword will come against Egypt and panic will overtake Ethiopia when the slain fall in Egypt and they carry away her wealth and dismantle her foundations.
EZE 30:5 Ethiopia, Put, Lud, all the foreigners, Libya, and the people of the covenant land will die by the sword along with them.
EZE 30:6 “‘This is what the Lord says: Egypt’s supporters will fall; her confident pride will crumble. From Migdol to Syene they will die by the sword within her, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 30:7 They will be desolate among desolate lands, and their cities will be among ruined cities.
EZE 30:8 They will know that I am the Lord when I ignite a fire in Egypt and all her allies are defeated.
EZE 30:9 On that day messengers will go out from me in ships to frighten overly confident Ethiopia; panic will overtake them on the day of Egypt’s doom; for beware – it is coming!
EZE 30:10 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: I will put an end to the hordes of Egypt, by the hand of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon.
EZE 30:11 He and his people with him, the most terrifying of the nations, will be brought there to destroy the land. They will draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with corpses.
EZE 30:12 I will dry up the waterways and hand the land over to evil men. I will make the land and everything in it desolate by the hand of foreigners. I, the Lord, have spoken!
EZE 30:13 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: I will destroy the idols, and put an end to the gods of Memphis. There will no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt; so I will make the land of Egypt fearful.
EZE 30:14 I will desolate Pathros, I will ignite a fire in Zoan, and I will execute judgments on Thebes.
EZE 30:15 I will pour out my anger upon Pelusium, the stronghold of Egypt; I will cut off the hordes of Thebes.
EZE 30:16 I will ignite a fire in Egypt; Syene will writhe in agony, Thebes will be broken down, and Memphis will face enemies every day.
EZE 30:17 The young men of On and of Pi-beseth will die by the sword; and the cities will go into captivity.
EZE 30:18 In Tahpanhes the day will be dark when I break the yoke of Egypt there. Her confident pride will cease within her; a cloud will cover her, and her daughters will go into captivity.
EZE 30:19 I will execute judgments on Egypt. Then they will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 30:20 In the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 30:21 “Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt. Look, it has not been bandaged for healing or set with a dressing so that it might become strong enough to grasp a sword.
EZE 30:22 Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and I will break his arms, the strong arm and the broken one, and I will make the sword drop from his hand.
EZE 30:23 I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them among foreign countries.
EZE 30:24 I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and I will place my sword in his hand, but I will break the arms of Pharaoh, and he will groan like the fatally wounded before the king of Babylon.
EZE 30:25 I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the arms of Pharaoh will fall limp. Then they will know that I am the Lord when I place my sword in the hand of the king of Babylon and he extends it against the land of Egypt.
EZE 30:26 I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among foreign countries. Then they will know that I am the Lord.”
EZE 31:1 In the eleventh year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 31:2 “Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt and his hordes: “‘Who are you like in your greatness?
EZE 31:3 Consider Assyria, a cedar in Lebanon, with beautiful branches, like a forest giving shade, and extremely tall; its top reached into the clouds.
EZE 31:4 The water made it grow; underground springs made it grow tall. Rivers flowed all around the place it was planted, while smaller channels watered all the trees of the field.
EZE 31:5 Therefore it grew taller than all the trees of the field; its boughs grew large and its branches grew long, because of the plentiful water in its shoots.
EZE 31:6 All the birds of the sky nested in its boughs; under its branches all the beasts of the field gave birth, in its shade all the great nations lived.
EZE 31:7 It was beautiful in its loftiness, in the length of its branches; for its roots went down deep to plentiful waters.
EZE 31:8 The cedars in the garden of God could not eclipse it, nor could the fir trees match its boughs; the plane trees were as nothing compared to its branches; no tree in the garden of God could rival its beauty.
EZE 31:9 I made it beautiful with its many branches; all the trees of Eden, in the garden of God, envied it.
EZE 31:10 “‘Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Because it was tall in stature, and its top reached into the clouds, and it was proud of its height,
EZE 31:11 I gave it over to the leader of the nations. He has judged it thoroughly, as its sinfulness deserves. I have thrown it out.
EZE 31:12 Foreigners from the most terrifying nations have cut it down and left it to lie there on the mountains. In all the valleys its branches have fallen, and its boughs lie broken in the ravines of the land. All the peoples of the land have departed from its shade and left it.
EZE 31:13 On its ruins all the birds of the sky will live, and all the wild animals will walk on its branches.
EZE 31:14 For this reason no watered trees will grow so tall; their tops will not reach into the clouds, nor will the well-watered ones grow that high. For all of them have been appointed to die in the lower parts of the earth; they will be among mere mortals, with those who descend to the pit.
EZE 31:15 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: On the day it went down to Sheol I caused observers to lament. I covered it with the deep and held back its rivers; its plentiful water was restrained. I clothed Lebanon in black for it, and all the trees of the field wilted because of it.
EZE 31:16 I made the nations shake at the sound of its fall, when I threw it down to Sheol, along with those who descend to the pit. Then all the trees of Eden, the choicest and the best of Lebanon, all that were well-watered, were comforted in the earth below.
EZE 31:17 Those who lived in its shade, its allies among the nations, also went down with it to Sheol, to those killed by the sword.
EZE 31:18 Which of the trees of Eden was like you in majesty and loftiness? You will be brought down with the trees of Eden to the lower parts of the earth; you will lie among the uncircumcised, with those killed by the sword! This is what will happen to Pharaoh and all his hordes, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 32:1 In the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, on the first of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 32:2 “Son of man, sing a lament for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say to him: “‘You were like a lion among the nations, but you are a monster in the seas; you thrash about in your streams, stir up the water with your feet, and muddy your streams.
EZE 32:3 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘I will throw my net over you in the assembly of many peoples; and they will haul you up in my dragnet.
EZE 32:4 I will leave you on the ground, I will fling you on the open field, I will allow all the birds of the sky to settle on you, and I will permit all the wild animals to gorge themselves on you.
EZE 32:5 I will put your flesh on the mountains, and fill the valleys with your maggot-infested carcass.
EZE 32:6 I will drench the land with the flow of your blood up to the mountains, and the ravines will be full of your blood.
EZE 32:7 When I extinguish you, I will cover the sky; I will darken its stars. I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon will not shine.
EZE 32:8 I will darken all the lights in the sky over you, and I will darken your land, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 32:9 I will disturb many peoples, when I bring about your destruction among the nations, among countries you do not know.
EZE 32:10 I will shock many peoples with you, and their kings will shiver with horror because of you. When I brandish my sword before them, every moment each one will tremble for his life, on the day of your fall.
EZE 32:11 “‘For this is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘The sword of the king of Babylon will attack you.
EZE 32:12 By the swords of the mighty warriors I will cause your hordes to fall – all of them are the most terrifying among the nations. They will devastate the pride of Egypt, and all its hordes will be destroyed.
EZE 32:13 I will destroy all its cattle beside the plentiful waters; and no human foot will disturb the waters again, nor will the hooves of cattle disturb them.
EZE 32:14 Then I will make their waters calm, and will make their streams flow like olive oil, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 32:15 When I turn the land of Egypt into desolation and the land is destitute of everything that fills it, when I strike all those who live in it, then they will know that I am the Lord.’
EZE 32:16 This is a lament; they will chant it. The daughters of the nations will chant it. They will chant it over Egypt and over all her hordes, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 32:17 In the twelfth year, on the fifteenth day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 32:18 “Son of man, wail over the horde of Egypt. Bring it down; bring her and the daughters of powerful nations down to the lower parts of the earth, along with those who descend to the pit.
EZE 32:19 Say to them, ‘Whom do you surpass in beauty? Go down and be laid to rest with the uncircumcised!’
EZE 32:20 They will fall among those killed by the sword. The sword is drawn; they carry her and all her hordes away.
EZE 32:21 The bravest of the warriors will speak to him from the midst of Sheol along with his allies, saying: ‘The uncircumcised have come down; they lie still, killed by the sword.’
EZE 32:22 “Assyria is there with all her assembly around her grave, all of them struck down by the sword.
EZE 32:23 Their graves are located in the remote slopes of the pit. Her assembly is around her grave, all of them struck down by the sword, those who spread terror in the land of the living.
EZE 32:24 “Elam is there with all her hordes around her grave; all of them struck down by the sword. They went down uncircumcised to the lower parts of the earth, those who spread terror in the land of the living. Now they will bear their shame with those who descend to the pit.
EZE 32:25 Among the dead they have made a bed for her, along with all her hordes around her grave. All of them are uncircumcised, killed by the sword, for their terror had spread in the land of the living. They bear their shame along with those who descend to the pit; they are placed among the dead.
EZE 32:26 “Meshech-Tubal is there, along with all her hordes around her grave. All of them are uncircumcised, killed by the sword, for they spread their terror in the land of the living.
EZE 32:27 They do not lie with the fallen warriors of ancient times, who went down to Sheol with their weapons of war, having their swords placed under their heads and their shields on their bones, when the terror of these warriors was in the land of the living.
EZE 32:28 “But as for you, in the midst of the uncircumcised you will be broken, and you will lie with those killed by the sword.
EZE 32:29 “Edom is there with her kings and all her princes. Despite their might they are laid with those killed by the sword; they lie with the uncircumcised and those who descend to the pit.
EZE 32:30 “All the leaders of the north are there, along with all the Sidonians; despite their might they have gone down in shameful terror with the dead. They lie uncircumcised with those killed by the sword, and bear their shame with those who descend to the pit.
EZE 32:31 “Pharaoh will see them and be consoled over all his hordes who were killed by the sword, Pharaoh and all his army, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 32:32 Indeed, I terrified him in the land of the living, yet he will lie in the midst of the uncircumcised with those killed by the sword, Pharaoh and all his hordes, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 33:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 33:2 “Son of man, speak to your people, and say to them, ‘Suppose I bring a sword against the land, and the people of the land take one man from their borders and make him their watchman.
EZE 33:3 He sees the sword coming against the land, blows the trumpet, and warns the people,
EZE 33:4 but there is one who hears the sound of the trumpet yet does not heed the warning. Then the sword comes and sweeps him away. He will be responsible for his own death.
EZE 33:5 He heard the sound of the trumpet but did not heed the warning, so he is responsible for himself. If he had heeded the warning, he would have saved his life.
EZE 33:6 But suppose the watchman sees the sword coming and does not blow the trumpet to warn the people. Then the sword comes and takes one of their lives. He is swept away for his iniquity, but I will hold the watchman accountable for that person’s death.’
EZE 33:7 “As for you, son of man, I have made you a watchman for the house of Israel. Whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them on my behalf.
EZE 33:8 When I say to the wicked, ‘O wicked man, you must certainly die,’ and you do not warn the wicked about his behavior, the wicked man will die for his iniquity, but I will hold you accountable for his death.
EZE 33:9 But if you warn the wicked man to change his behavior, and he refuses to change, he will die for his iniquity, but you have saved your own life.
EZE 33:10 “And you, son of man, say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what you have said: “Our rebellious acts and our sins have caught up with us, and we are wasting away because of them. How then can we live?”’
EZE 33:11 Say to them, ‘As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but prefer that the wicked change his behavior and live. Turn back, turn back from your evil deeds! Why should you die, O house of Israel?’
EZE 33:12 “And you, son of man, say to your people, ‘The righteousness of the righteous will not deliver him if he rebels. As for the wicked, his wickedness will not make him stumble if he turns from it. The righteous will not be able to live by his righteousness if he sins.’
EZE 33:13 Suppose I tell the righteous that he will certainly live, but he becomes confident in his righteousness and commits iniquity. None of his righteous deeds will be remembered; because of the iniquity he has committed he will die.
EZE 33:14 Suppose I say to the wicked, ‘You must certainly die,’ but he turns from his sin and does what is just and right.
EZE 33:15 He returns what was taken in pledge, pays back what he has stolen, and follows the statutes that give life, committing no iniquity. He will certainly live – he will not die.
EZE 33:16 None of the sins he has committed will be counted against him. He has done what is just and right; he will certainly live.
EZE 33:17 “Yet your people say, ‘The behavior of the Lord is not right,’ when it is their behavior that is not right.
EZE 33:18 When a righteous man turns from his godliness and commits iniquity, he will die for it.
EZE 33:19 When the wicked turns from his sin and does what is just and right, he will live because of it.
EZE 33:20 Yet you say, ‘The behavior of the Lord is not right.’ House of Israel, I will judge each of you according to his behavior.”
EZE 33:21 In the twelfth year of our exile, in the tenth month, on the fifth of the month, a refugee came to me from Jerusalem saying, “The city has been defeated!”
EZE 33:22 Now the hand of the Lord had been on me the evening before the refugee reached me, but the Lord opened my mouth by the time the refugee arrived in the morning; he opened my mouth and I was no longer unable to speak.
EZE 33:23 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 33:24 “Son of man, the ones living in these ruins in the land of Israel are saying, ‘Abraham was only one man, yet he possessed the land, but we are many; surely the land has been given to us for a possession.’
EZE 33:25 Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: You eat the meat with the blood still in it, pray to your idols, and shed blood. Do you really think you will possess the land?
EZE 33:26 You rely on your swords and commit abominable deeds; each of you defiles his neighbor’s wife. Will you possess the land?’
EZE 33:27 “This is what you must say to them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: As surely as I live, those living in the ruins will die by the sword, those in the open field I will give to the wild beasts for food, and those who are in the strongholds and caves will die of disease.
EZE 33:28 I will turn the land into a desolate ruin; her confident pride will come to an end. The mountains of Israel will be so desolate no one will pass through them.
EZE 33:29 Then they will know that I am the Lord when I turn the land into a desolate ruin because of all the abominable deeds they have committed.’
EZE 33:30 “But as for you, son of man, your people (who are talking about you by the walls and at the doors of the houses) say to one another, ‘Come hear the word that comes from the Lord.’
EZE 33:31 They come to you in crowds, and they sit in front of you as my people. They hear your words, but do not obey them. For they talk lustfully, and their heart is set on their own advantage.
EZE 33:32 Realize that to them you are like a sensual song, a beautiful voice and skilled musician. They hear your words, but they do not obey them.
EZE 33:33 When all this comes true – and it certainly will – then they will know that a prophet was among them.”
EZE 34:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 34:2 “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel; prophesy, and say to them – to the shepherds: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Woe to the shepherds of Israel who have been feeding themselves! Should not shepherds feed the flock?
EZE 34:3 You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, you slaughter the choice animals, but you do not feed the sheep!
EZE 34:4 You have not strengthened the weak, healed the sick, bandaged the injured, brought back the strays, or sought the lost, but with force and harshness you have ruled over them.
EZE 34:5 They were scattered because they had no shepherd, and they became food for every wild beast.
EZE 34:6 My sheep wandered over all the mountains and on every high hill. My sheep were scattered over the entire face of the earth with no one looking or searching for them.
EZE 34:7 “‘Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the Lord:
EZE 34:8 As surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, my sheep have become prey and have become food for all the wild beasts. There was no shepherd, and my shepherds did not search for my flock, but fed themselves and did not feed my sheep,
EZE 34:9 Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the Lord:
EZE 34:10 This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am against the shepherds, and I will demand my sheep from their hand. I will no longer let them be shepherds; the shepherds will not feed themselves anymore. I will rescue my sheep from their mouth, so that they will no longer be food for them.
EZE 34:11 “‘For this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I myself will search for my sheep and seek them out.
EZE 34:12 As a shepherd seeks out his flock when he is among his scattered sheep, so I will seek out my flock. I will rescue them from all the places where they have been scattered on a cloudy, dark day.
EZE 34:13 I will bring them out from among the peoples and gather them from foreign countries; I will bring them to their own land. I will feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the streams and all the inhabited places of the land.
EZE 34:14 In a good pasture I will feed them; the mountain heights of Israel will be their pasture. There they will lie down in a lush pasture, and they will feed on rich grass on the mountains of Israel.
EZE 34:15 I myself will feed my sheep and I myself will make them lie down, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 34:16 I will seek the lost and bring back the strays; I will bandage the injured and strengthen the sick, but the fat and the strong I will destroy. I will feed them – with judgment!
EZE 34:17 “‘As for you, my sheep, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am about to judge between one sheep and another, between rams and goats.
EZE 34:18 Is it not enough for you to feed on the good pasture, that you must trample the rest of your pastures with your feet? When you drink clean water, must you muddy the rest of the water by trampling it with your feet?
EZE 34:19 As for my sheep, they must eat what you trampled with your feet, and drink what you have muddied with your feet!
EZE 34:20 “‘Therefore, this is what the sovereign Lord says to them: Look, I myself will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep.
EZE 34:21 Because you push with your side and your shoulder, and thrust your horns at all the weak sheep until you scatter them abroad,
EZE 34:22 I will save my sheep; they will no longer be prey. I will judge between one sheep and another.
EZE 34:23 I will set one shepherd over them, and he will feed them – namely, my servant David. He will feed them and will be their shepherd.
EZE 34:24 I, the Lord, will be their God, and my servant David will be prince among them; I, the Lord, have spoken!
EZE 34:25 “‘I will make a covenant of peace with them and will rid the land of wild beasts, so that they can live securely in the wilderness and even sleep in the woods.
EZE 34:26 I will turn them and the regions around my hill into a blessing. I will make showers come down in their season; they will be showers that bring blessing.
EZE 34:27 The trees of the field will yield their fruit and the earth will yield its crops. They will live securely on their land; they will know that I am the Lord, when I break the bars of their yoke and rescue them from the hand of those who enslaved them.
EZE 34:28 They will no longer be prey for the nations and the wild beasts will not devour them. They will live securely and no one will make them afraid.
EZE 34:29 I will prepare for them a healthy planting. They will no longer be victims of famine in the land and will no longer bear the insults of the nations.
EZE 34:30 Then they will know that I, the Lord their God, am with them, and that they are my people, the house of Israel, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 34:31 And you, my sheep, the sheep of my pasture, are my people, and I am your God, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 35:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 35:2 “Son of man, turn toward Mount Seir, and prophesy against it.
EZE 35:3 Say to it, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: “‘Look, I am against you, Mount Seir; I will stretch out my hand against you and turn you into a desolate ruin.
EZE 35:4 I will lay waste your cities; and you will become desolate. Then you will know that I am the Lord!
EZE 35:5 “‘You have shown unrelenting hostility and poured the people of Israel onto the blades of a sword at the time of their calamity, at the time of their final punishment.
EZE 35:6 Therefore, as surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, I will subject you to bloodshed, and bloodshed will pursue you. Since you did not hate bloodshed, bloodshed will pursue you.
EZE 35:7 I will turn Mount Seir into a desolate ruin; I will cut off from it the one who passes through or returns.
EZE 35:8 I will fill its mountains with its dead; on your hills and in your valleys and in all your ravines, those killed by the sword will fall.
EZE 35:9 I will turn you into a perpetual desolation, and your cities will not be inhabited. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 35:10 “‘You said, “These two nations, these two lands will be mine, and we will possess them,” – although the Lord was there –
EZE 35:11 therefore, as surely as I live, declares the sovereign Lord, I will deal with you according to your anger, and according to your envy, by which you acted spitefully against them. I will reveal myself to them when I judge you.
EZE 35:12 Then you will know that I, the Lord, have heard all the insults you spoke against the mountains of Israel, saying, “They are desolate, they have been given to us for food.”
EZE 35:13 You exalted yourselves against me with your speech and hurled many insults against me – I have heard them all!
EZE 35:14 This is what the sovereign Lord says: While the whole earth rejoices, I will turn you into a desolation.
EZE 35:15 As you rejoiced over the inheritance of the house of Israel because it was desolate, so will I deal with you – you will be desolate, Mount Seir, and all of Edom – all of it! Then they will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 36:1 “As for you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel, and say: ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord!
EZE 36:2 This is what the sovereign Lord says: The enemy has spoken against you, saying “Aha!” and, “The ancient heights have become our property!”’
EZE 36:3 So prophesy and say: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Surely because they have made you desolate and crushed you from all directions, so that you have become the property of the rest of the nations, and have become the subject of gossip and slander among the people,
EZE 36:4 therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the sovereign Lord: This is what the sovereign Lord says to the mountains and hills, the ravines and valleys, and to the desolate ruins and the abandoned cities that have become prey and an object of derision to the rest of the nations round about –
EZE 36:5 therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Surely I have spoken in the fire of my zeal against the rest of the nations, and against all Edom, who with great joy and utter contempt have made my land their property and prey, because of its pasture.’
EZE 36:6 “Therefore prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and hills, the ravines and valleys, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I have spoken in my zeal and in my anger, because you have endured the insults of the nations.
EZE 36:7 So this is what the sovereign Lord says: I vow that the nations around you will endure insults as well.
EZE 36:8 “‘But you, mountains of Israel, will grow your branches, and bear your fruit for my people Israel; for they will arrive soon.
EZE 36:9 For indeed, I am on your side; I will turn to you, and you will be plowed and planted.
EZE 36:10 I will multiply your people – the whole house of Israel, all of it. The cities will be populated and the ruins rebuilt.
EZE 36:11 I will increase the number of people and animals on you; they will increase and be fruitful. I will cause you to be inhabited as in ancient times, and will do more good for you than at the beginning of your history. Then you will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 36:12 I will lead people, my people Israel, across you; they will possess you and you will become their inheritance. No longer will you bereave them of their children.
EZE 36:13 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Because they are saying to you, “You are a devourer of men, and bereave your nation of children,”
EZE 36:14 therefore you will no longer devour people and no longer bereave your nation of children, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 36:15 I will no longer subject you to the nations’ insults; no longer will you bear the shame of the peoples, and no longer will you bereave your nation, declares the sovereign Lord.’”
EZE 36:16 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 36:17 “Son of man, when the house of Israel was living on their own land, they defiled it by their behavior and their deeds. In my sight their behavior was like the uncleanness of a woman having her monthly period.
EZE 36:18 So I poured my anger on them because of the blood they shed on the land and because of the idols with which they defiled it.
EZE 36:19 I scattered them among the nations; they were dispersed throughout foreign countries. In accordance with their behavior and their deeds I judged them.
EZE 36:20 But when they arrived in the nations where they went, they profaned my holy name. It was said of them, ‘These are the people of the Lord, yet they have departed from his land.’
EZE 36:21 I was concerned for my holy reputation which the house of Israel profaned among the nations where they went.
EZE 36:22 “Therefore say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: It is not for your sake that I am about to act, O house of Israel, but for the sake of my holy reputation which you profaned among the nations where you went.
EZE 36:23 I will magnify my great name that has been profaned among the nations, that you have profaned among them. The nations will know that I am the Lord, declares the sovereign Lord, when I magnify myself among you in their sight.
EZE 36:24 “‘I will take you from the nations and gather you from all the countries; then I will bring you to your land.
EZE 36:25 I will sprinkle you with pure water and you will be clean from all your impurities. I will purify you from all your idols.
EZE 36:26 I will give you a new heart, and I will put a new spirit within you. I will remove the heart of stone from your body and give you a heart of flesh.
EZE 36:27 I will put my Spirit within you; I will take the initiative and you will obey my statutes and carefully observe my regulations.
EZE 36:28 Then you will live in the land I gave to your fathers; you will be my people, and I will be your God.
EZE 36:29 I will save you from all your uncleanness. I will call for the grain and multiply it; I will not bring a famine on you.
EZE 36:30 I will multiply the fruit of the trees and the produce of the fields, so that you will never again suffer the disgrace of famine among the nations.
EZE 36:31 Then you will remember your evil behavior and your deeds which were not good; you will loathe yourselves on account of your sins and your abominable deeds.
EZE 36:32 Understand that it is not for your sake I am about to act, declares the sovereign Lord. Be ashamed and embarrassed by your behavior, O house of Israel.
EZE 36:33 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: In the day I cleanse you from all your sins, I will populate the cities and the ruins will be rebuilt.
EZE 36:34 The desolate land will be plowed, instead of being desolate in the sight of everyone who passes by.
EZE 36:35 They will say, “This desolate land has become like the garden of Eden; the ruined, desolate, and destroyed cities are now fortified and inhabited.”
EZE 36:36 Then the nations which remain around you will know that I, the Lord, have rebuilt the ruins and replanted what was desolate. I, the Lord, have spoken – and I will do it!’
EZE 36:37 “This is what the sovereign Lord says: I will allow the house of Israel to ask me to do this for them: I will multiply their people like sheep.
EZE 36:38 Like the sheep for offerings, like the sheep of Jerusalem during her appointed feasts, so will the ruined cities be filled with flocks of people. Then they will know that I am the Lord.”
EZE 37:1 The hand of the Lord was on me, and he brought me out by the Spirit of the Lord and placed me in the midst of the valley, and it was full of bones.
EZE 37:2 He made me walk all around among them. I realized there were a great many bones in the valley and they were very dry.
EZE 37:3 He said to me, “Son of man, can these bones live?” I said to him, “Sovereign Lord, you know.”
EZE 37:4 Then he said to me, “Prophesy over these bones, and tell them: ‘Dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.
EZE 37:5 This is what the sovereign Lord says to these bones: Look, I am about to infuse breath into you and you will live.
EZE 37:6 I will put tendons on you and muscles over you and will cover you with skin; I will put breath in you and you will live. Then you will know that I am the Lord.’”
EZE 37:7 So I prophesied as I was commanded. There was a sound when I prophesied – I heard a rattling, and the bones came together, bone to bone.
EZE 37:8 As I watched, I saw tendons on them, then muscles appeared, and skin covered over them from above, but there was no breath in them.
EZE 37:9 He said to me, “Prophesy to the breath, – prophesy, son of man – and say to the breath: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe on these corpses so that they may live.’”
EZE 37:10 So I prophesied as I was commanded, and the breath came into them; they lived and stood on their feet, an extremely great army.
EZE 37:11 Then he said to me, “Son of man, these bones are all the house of Israel. Look, they are saying, ‘Our bones are dry, our hope has perished; we are cut off.’
EZE 37:12 Therefore prophesy, and tell them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am about to open your graves and will raise you from your graves, my people. I will bring you to the land of Israel.
EZE 37:13 Then you will know that I am the Lord, when I open your graves and raise you from your graves, my people.
EZE 37:14 I will place my breath in you and you will live; I will give you rest in your own land. Then you will know that I am the Lord – I have spoken and I will act, declares the Lord.’”
EZE 37:15 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 37:16 “As for you, son of man, take one branch, and write on it, ‘For Judah, and for the Israelites associated with him.’ Then take another branch and write on it, ‘For Joseph, the branch of Ephraim and all the house of Israel associated with him.’
EZE 37:17 Join them as one stick; they will be as one in your hand.
EZE 37:18 When your people say to you, ‘Will you not tell us what these things mean?’
EZE 37:19 tell them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am about to take the branch of Joseph which is in the hand of Ephraim and the tribes of Israel associated with him, and I will place them on the stick of Judah, and make them into one stick – they will be one in my hand.’
EZE 37:20 The sticks you write on will be in your hand in front of them.
EZE 37:21 Then tell them, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am about to take the Israelites from among the nations where they have gone. I will gather them from round about and bring them to their land.
EZE 37:22 I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel, and one king will rule over them all. They will never again be two nations and never again be divided into two kingdoms.
EZE 37:23 They will not defile themselves with their idols, their detestable things, and all their rebellious deeds. I will save them from all their unfaithfulness by which they sinned. I will purify them; they will become my people and I will become their God.
EZE 37:24 “‘My servant David will be king over them; there will be one shepherd for all of them. They will follow my regulations and carefully observe my statutes.
EZE 37:25 They will live in the land I gave to my servant Jacob, in which your fathers lived; they will live in it – they and their children and their grandchildren forever. David my servant will be prince over them forever.
EZE 37:26 I will make a covenant of peace with them; it will be a perpetual covenant with them. I will establish them, increase their numbers, and place my sanctuary among them forever.
EZE 37:27 My dwelling place will be with them; I will be their God, and they will be my people.
EZE 37:28 Then, when my sanctuary is among them forever, the nations will know that I, the Lord, sanctify Israel.’”
EZE 38:1 The word of the Lord came to me:
EZE 38:2 “Son of man, turn toward Gog, of the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal. Prophesy against him
EZE 38:3 and say: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am against you, Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
EZE 38:4 I will turn you around, put hooks into your jaws, and bring you out with all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them fully armed, a great company with shields of different types, all of them armed with swords.
EZE 38:5 Persia, Ethiopia, and Put are with them, all of them with shields and helmets.
EZE 38:6 They are joined by Gomer with all its troops, and by Beth Togarmah from the remote parts of the north with all its troops – many peoples are with you.
EZE 38:7 “‘Be ready and stay ready, you and all your companies assembled around you, and be a guard for them.
EZE 38:8 After many days you will be summoned; in the latter years you will come to a land restored from the ravages of war, with many peoples gathered on the mountains of Israel that had long been in ruins. Its people were brought out from the peoples, and all of them will be living securely.
EZE 38:9 You will advance; you will come like a storm. You will be like a cloud covering the earth, you, all your troops, and the many other peoples with you.
EZE 38:10 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: On that day thoughts will come into your mind, and you will devise an evil plan.
EZE 38:11 You will say, “I will invade a land of unwalled towns; I will advance against those living quietly in security – all of them living without walls and barred gates –
EZE 38:12 to loot and plunder, to attack the inhabited ruins and the people gathered from the nations, who are acquiring cattle and goods, who live at the center of the earth.”
EZE 38:13 Sheba and Dedan and the traders of Tarshish with all its young warriors will say to you, “Have you come to loot? Have you assembled your armies to plunder, to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to haul away a great amount of spoils?”’
EZE 38:14 “Therefore, prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: On that day when my people Israel are living securely, you will take notice
EZE 38:15 and come from your place, from the remote parts of the north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great company and a vast army.
EZE 38:16 You will advance against my people Israel like a cloud covering the earth. In the latter days I will bring you against my land so that the nations may acknowledge me, when before their eyes I magnify myself through you, O Gog.
EZE 38:17 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Are you the one of whom I spoke in former days by my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied in those days that I would bring you against them?
EZE 38:18 On that day, when Gog invades the land of Israel, declares the sovereign Lord, my rage will mount up in my anger.
EZE 38:19 In my zeal, in the fire of my fury, I declare that on that day there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
EZE 38:20 The fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, the wild beasts, all the things that creep on the ground, and all people who live on the face of the earth will shake at my presence. The mountains will topple, the cliffs will fall, and every wall will fall to the ground.
EZE 38:21 I will call for a sword to attack Gog on all my mountains, declares the sovereign Lord; every man’s sword will be against his brother.
EZE 38:22 I will judge him with plague and bloodshed. I will rain down on him, his troops and the many peoples who are with him a torrential downpour, hailstones, fire, and brimstone.
EZE 38:23 I will exalt and magnify myself; I will reveal myself before many nations. Then they will know that I am the Lord.’
EZE 39:1 “As for you, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say: ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Look, I am against you, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal!
EZE 39:2 I will turn you around and drag you along; I will lead you up from the remotest parts of the north and bring you against the mountains of Israel.
EZE 39:3 I will knock your bow out of your left hand and make your arrows fall from your right hand.
EZE 39:4 You will fall dead on the mountains of Israel, you and all your troops and the people who are with you. I give you as food to every kind of bird and every wild beast.
EZE 39:5 You will fall dead in the open field; for I have spoken, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 39:6 I will send fire on Magog and those who live securely in the coastlands; then they will know that I am the Lord.
EZE 39:7 “‘I will make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; I will not let my holy name be profaned anymore. Then the nations will know that I am the Lord, the Holy One of Israel.
EZE 39:8 Realize that it is coming and it will be done, declares the sovereign Lord. It is the day I have spoken about.
EZE 39:9 “‘Then those who live in the cities of Israel will go out and use the weapons for kindling – the shields, bows and arrows, war clubs and spears – they will burn them for seven years.
EZE 39:10 They will not need to take wood from the field or cut down trees from the forests, because they will make fires with the weapons. They will take the loot from those who looted them and seize the plunder of those who plundered them, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 39:11 “‘On that day I will assign Gog a grave in Israel. It will be the valley of those who travel east of the sea; it will block the way of the travelers. There they will bury Gog and all his horde; they will call it the valley of Hamon-Gog.
EZE 39:12 For seven months Israel will bury them, in order to cleanse the land.
EZE 39:13 All the people of the land will bury them, and it will be a memorial for them on the day I magnify myself, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 39:14 They will designate men to scout continually through the land, burying those who remain on the surface of the ground, in order to cleanse it. They will search for seven full months.
EZE 39:15 When the scouts survey the land and see a human bone, they will place a sign by it, until those assigned to burial duty have buried it in the valley of Hamon-Gog.
EZE 39:16 (A city by the name of Hamonah will also be there.) They will cleanse the land.’
EZE 39:17 “As for you, son of man, this is what the sovereign Lord says: Tell every kind of bird and every wild beast: ‘Assemble and come! Gather from all around to my slaughter which I am going to make for you, a great slaughter on the mountains of Israel! You will eat flesh and drink blood.
EZE 39:18 You will eat the flesh of warriors and drink the blood of the princes of the earth – the rams, lambs, goats, and bulls, all of them fattened animals of Bashan.
EZE 39:19 You will eat fat until you are full, and drink blood until you are drunk, at my slaughter which I have made for you.
EZE 39:20 You will fill up at my table with horses and charioteers, with warriors and all the soldiers,’ declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 39:21 “I will display my majesty among the nations. All the nations will witness the judgment I have executed, and the power I have exhibited among them.
EZE 39:22 Then the house of Israel will know that I am the Lord their God, from that day forward.
EZE 39:23 The nations will know that the house of Israel went into exile due to their iniquity, for they were unfaithful to me. So I hid my face from them and handed them over to their enemies; all of them died by the sword.
EZE 39:24 According to their uncleanness and rebellion I have dealt with them, and I hid my face from them.
EZE 39:25 “Therefore this is what the sovereign Lord says: Now I will restore the fortunes of Jacob, and I will have mercy on the entire house of Israel. I will be zealous for my holy name.
EZE 39:26 They will bear their shame for all their unfaithful acts against me, when they live securely on their land with no one to make them afraid.
EZE 39:27 When I have brought them back from the peoples and gathered them from the countries of their enemies, I will magnify myself among them in the sight of many nations.
EZE 39:28 Then they will know that I am the Lord their God, because I sent them into exile among the nations, and then gathered them into their own land. I will not leave any of them in exile any longer.
EZE 39:29 I will no longer hide my face from them, when I pour out my Spirit on the house of Israel, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 40:1 In the twenty-fifth year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the city was struck down, on this very day, the hand of the Lord was on me, and he brought me there.
EZE 40:2 By means of divine visions he brought me to the land of Israel and placed me on a very high mountain, and on it was a structure like a city, to the south.
EZE 40:3 When he brought me there, I saw a man whose appearance was like bronze, with a linen cord and a measuring stick in his hand. He was standing in the gateway.
EZE 40:4 The man said to me, “Son of man, watch closely, listen carefully, and pay attention to everything I show you, for you have been brought here so that I can show it to you. Tell the house of Israel everything you see.”
EZE 40:5 I saw a wall all around the outside of the temple. In the man’s hand was a measuring stick 10½ feet long. He measured the thickness of the wall as 10½ feet, and its height as 10½ feet.
EZE 40:6 Then he went to the gate facing east. He climbed its steps and measured the threshold of the gate as 10½ feet deep.
EZE 40:7 The alcoves were 10½ feet long and 10½ feet wide; between the alcoves were 8¾ feet. The threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate facing inward was 10½ feet.
EZE 40:8 Then he measured the porch of the gate facing inward as 10½ feet.
EZE 40:9 He measured the porch of the gate as 14 feet, and its jambs as 3½ feet; the porch of the gate faced inward.
EZE 40:10 There were three alcoves on each side of the east gate; the three had the same measurement, and the jambs on either side had the same measurement.
EZE 40:11 He measured the width of the entrance of the gateway as 17½ feet, and the length of the gateway as 22¾ feet.
EZE 40:12 There was a barrier in front of the alcoves, 1¾ feet on either side; the alcoves were 10½ feet on either side.
EZE 40:13 He measured the gateway from the roof of one alcove to the roof of the other, a width of 43¾ feet from one entrance to the opposite one.
EZE 40:14 He measured the porch at 105 feet high; the gateway went all around to the jamb of the courtyard.
EZE 40:15 From the front of the entrance gate to the porch of the inner gate was 87½ feet.
EZE 40:16 There were closed windows toward the alcoves and toward their jambs within the gate all around, and likewise for the porches. There were windows all around the inside, and on each jamb were decorative palm trees.
EZE 40:17 Then he brought me to the outer court. I saw chambers there, and a pavement made for the court all around; thirty chambers faced the pavement.
EZE 40:18 The pavement was beside the gates, corresponding to the length of the gates; this was the lower pavement.
EZE 40:19 Then he measured the width from before the lower gate to the front of the exterior of the inner court as 175 feet on the east and on the north.
EZE 40:20 He measured the length and width of the gate of the outer court which faces north.
EZE 40:21 Its alcoves, three on each side, and its jambs and porches had the same measurement as the first gate; 87½ feet long and 43¾ feet wide.
EZE 40:22 Its windows, its porches, and its decorative palm trees had the same measurement as the gate which faced east. Seven steps led up to it, and its porch was in front of them.
EZE 40:23 Opposite the gate on the north and the east was a gate of the inner court; he measured the distance from gate to gate at 175 feet.
EZE 40:24 Then he led me toward the south. I saw a gate on the south. He measured its jambs and its porches; they had the same dimensions as the others.
EZE 40:25 There were windows all around it and its porches, like the windows of the others; 87½ feet long and 43¾ feet wide.
EZE 40:26 There were seven steps going up to it; its porches were in front of them. It had decorative palm trees on its jambs, one on either side.
EZE 40:27 The inner court had a gate toward the south; he measured it from gate to gate toward the south as 175 feet.
EZE 40:28 Then he brought me to the inner court by the south gate. He measured the south gate; it had the same dimensions as the others.
EZE 40:29 Its alcoves, its jambs, and its porches had the same dimensions as the others, and there were windows all around it and its porches; its length was 87½ feet and its width 43¾ feet.
EZE 40:30 There were porches all around, 43¾ feet long and 8¾ feet wide.
EZE 40:31 Its porches faced the outer court, and decorative palm trees were on its jambs, and its stairway had eight steps.
EZE 40:32 Then he brought me to the inner court on the east side. He measured the gate; it had the same dimensions as the others.
EZE 40:33 Its alcoves, its jambs, and its porches had the same dimensions as the others, and there were windows all around it and its porches; its length was 87½ feet and its width 43¾ feet.
EZE 40:34 Its porches faced the outer court, it had decorative palm trees on its jambs, and its stairway had eight steps.
EZE 40:35 Then he brought me to the north gate, and he measured it; it had the same dimensions as the others –
EZE 40:36 its alcoves, its jambs, and its porches. It had windows all around it; its length was 87½ feet and its width 43¾ feet.
EZE 40:37 Its jambs faced the outer court, and it had decorative palm trees on its jambs, on either side, and its stairway had eight steps.
EZE 40:38 There was a chamber with its door by the porch of the gate; there they washed the burnt offering.
EZE 40:39 In the porch of the gate were two tables on either side on which to slaughter the burnt offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering.
EZE 40:40 On the outside of the porch as one goes up at the entrance of the north gate were two tables, and on the other side of the porch of the gate were two tables.
EZE 40:41 Four tables were on each side of the gate, eight tables on which the sacrifices were to be slaughtered.
EZE 40:42 The four tables for the burnt offering were of carved stone, 32 inches long, 32 inches wide, and 21 inches high. They would put the instruments which they used to slaughter the burnt offering and the sacrifice on them.
EZE 40:43 There were hooks three inches long, fastened in the house all around, and on the tables was the flesh of the offering.
EZE 40:44 On the outside of the inner gate were chambers for the singers of the inner court, one at the side of the north gate facing south, and the other at the side of the south gate facing north.
EZE 40:45 He said to me, “This chamber which faces south is for the priests who keep charge of the temple,
EZE 40:46 and the chamber which faces north is for the priests who keep charge of the altar. These are the descendants of Zadok, from the descendants of Levi, who may approach the Lord to minister to him.”
EZE 40:47 He measured the court as a square 175 feet long and 175 feet wide; the altar was in front of the temple.
EZE 40:48 Then he brought me to the porch of the temple and measured the jambs of the porch as 8¾ feet on either side, and the width of the gate was 24½ feet and the sides were 5¼ feet on each side.
EZE 40:49 The length of the porch was 35 feet and the width 19¼ feet; steps led up to it, and there were pillars beside the jambs on either side.
EZE 41:1 Then he brought me to the outer sanctuary, and measured the jambs; the jambs were 10½ feet wide on each side.
EZE 41:2 The width of the entrance was 17½ feet, and the sides of the entrance were 8¾ feet on each side. He measured the length of the outer sanctuary as 70 feet, and its width as 35 feet.
EZE 41:3 Then he went into the inner sanctuary and measured the jambs of the entrance as 3½ feet, the entrance as 10½ feet, and the width of the entrance as 12¼ feet
EZE 41:4 Then he measured its length as 35 feet, and its width as 35 feet, before the outer sanctuary. He said to me, “This is the most holy place.”
EZE 41:5 Then he measured the wall of the temple as 10½ feet, and the width of the side chambers as 7 feet, all around the temple.
EZE 41:6 The side chambers were in three stories, one above the other, thirty in each story. There were offsets in the wall all around to serve as supports for the side chambers, so that the supports were not in the wall of the temple.
EZE 41:7 The side chambers surrounding the temple were wider at each successive story; for the structure surrounding the temple went up story by story all around the temple. For this reason the width of the temple increased as it went up, and one went up from the lowest story to the highest by the way of the middle story.
EZE 41:8 I saw that the temple had a raised platform all around; the foundations of the side chambers were a full measuring stick of 10½ feet high.
EZE 41:9 The width of the outer wall of the side chambers was 8¾ feet, and the open area between the side chambers of the temple
EZE 41:10 and the chambers of the court was 35 feet in width all around the temple on every side.
EZE 41:11 There were entrances from the side chambers toward the open area, one entrance toward the north, and another entrance toward the south; the width of the open area was 8¾ feet all around.
EZE 41:12 The building that was facing the temple courtyard at the west side was 122½ feet wide; the wall of the building was 8¾ feet all around, and its length 157½ feet.
EZE 41:13 Then he measured the temple as 175 feet long, the courtyard of the temple and the building and its walls as 175 feet long,
EZE 41:14 and also the width of the front of the temple and the courtyard on the east as 175 feet.
EZE 41:15 Then he measured the length of the building facing the courtyard at the rear of the temple, with its galleries on either side as 175 feet. The interior of the outer sanctuary and the porch of the court,
EZE 41:16 as well as the thresholds, narrow windows and galleries all around on three sides facing the threshold were paneled with wood all around, from the ground up to the windows (now the windows were covered),
EZE 41:17 to the space above the entrance, to the inner room, and on the outside, and on all the walls in the inner room and outside, by measurement.
EZE 41:18 It was made with cherubim and decorative palm trees, with a palm tree between each cherub. Each cherub had two faces:
EZE 41:19 a human face toward the palm tree on one side and a lion’s face toward the palm tree on the other side. They were carved on the whole temple all around;
EZE 41:20 from the ground to the area above the entrance, cherubim and decorative palm trees were carved on the wall of the outer sanctuary.
EZE 41:21 The doorposts of the outer sanctuary were square. In front of the sanctuary one doorpost looked just like the other.
EZE 41:22 The altar was of wood, 5¼ feet high, with its length 3½ feet; its corners, its length, and its walls were of wood. He said to me, “This is the table that is before the Lord.”
EZE 41:23 The outer sanctuary and the inner sanctuary each had a double door.
EZE 41:24 Each of the doors had two leaves, two swinging leaves; two leaves for one door and two leaves for the other.
EZE 41:25 On the doors of the outer sanctuary were carved cherubim and palm trees, like those carved on the walls, and there was a canopy of wood on the front of the outside porch.
EZE 41:26 There were narrow windows and decorative palm trees on either side of the side walls of the porch; this is what the side chambers of the temple and the canopies were like.
EZE 42:1 Then he led me out to the outer court, toward the north, and brought me to the chamber which was opposite the courtyard and opposite the building on the north.
EZE 42:2 Its length was 175 feet on the north side, and its width 87½ feet.
EZE 42:3 Opposite the 35 feet that belonged to the inner court, and opposite the pavement which belonged to the outer court, gallery faced gallery in the three stories.
EZE 42:4 In front of the chambers was a walkway on the inner side, 17½ feet wide at a distance of 1¾ feet, and their entrances were on the north.
EZE 42:5 Now the upper chambers were narrower, because the galleries took more space from them than from the lower and middle chambers of the building.
EZE 42:6 For they were in three stories and had no pillars like the pillars of the courts; therefore the upper chambers were set back from the ground more than the lower and upper ones.
EZE 42:7 As for the outer wall by the side of the chambers, toward the outer court facing the chambers, it was 87½ feet long.
EZE 42:8 For the chambers on the outer court were 87½ feet long, while those facing the temple were 175 feet long.
EZE 42:9 Below these chambers was a passage on the east side as one enters from the outer court.
EZE 42:10 At the beginning of the wall of the court toward the south, facing the courtyard and the building, were chambers
EZE 42:11 with a passage in front of them. They looked like the chambers on the north. Of the same length and width, and all their exits according to their arrangements and entrances
EZE 42:12 were the chambers which were toward the south. There was an opening at the head of the passage, the passage in front of the corresponding wall toward the east when one enters.
EZE 42:13 Then he said to me, “The north chambers and the south chambers which face the courtyard are holy chambers where the priests who approach the Lord will eat the most holy offerings. There they will place the most holy offerings – the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, because the place is holy.
EZE 42:14 When the priests enter, then they will not go out from the sanctuary to the outer court without taking off their garments in which they minister, for these are holy; they will put on other garments, then they will go near the places where the people are.”
EZE 42:15 Now when he had finished measuring the interior of the temple, he led me out by the gate which faces east and measured all around.
EZE 42:16 He measured the east side with the measuring stick as 875 feet by the measuring stick.
EZE 42:17 He measured the north side as 875 feet by the measuring stick.
EZE 42:18 He measured the south side as 875 feet by the measuring stick.
EZE 42:19 He turned to the west side and measured 875 feet by the measuring stick.
EZE 42:20 He measured it on all four sides. It had a wall around it, 875 feet long and 875 feet wide, to separate the holy and common places.
EZE 43:1 Then he brought me to the gate that faced toward the east.
EZE 43:2 I saw the glory of the God of Israel coming from the east; the sound was like that of rushing water; and the earth radiated his glory.
EZE 43:3 It was like the vision I saw when he came to destroy the city, and the vision I saw by the Kebar River. I threw myself face down.
EZE 43:4 The glory of the Lord came into the temple by way of the gate that faces east.
EZE 43:5 Then a wind lifted me up and brought me to the inner court; I watched the glory of the Lord filling the temple.
EZE 43:6 I heard someone speaking to me from the temple, while the man was standing beside me.
EZE 43:7 He said to me: “Son of man, this is the place of my throne and the place for the soles of my feet, where I will live among the people of Israel forever. The house of Israel will no longer profane my holy name, neither they nor their kings, by their spiritual prostitution or by the pillars of their kings set up when they die.
EZE 43:8 When they placed their threshold by my threshold and their doorpost by my doorpost, with only the wall between me and them, they profaned my holy name by the abominable deeds they committed. So I consumed them in my anger.
EZE 43:9 Now they must put away their spiritual prostitution and the pillars of their kings far from me, and then I will live among them forever.
EZE 43:10 “As for you, son of man, describe the temple to the house of Israel, so that they will be ashamed of their sins and measure the pattern.
EZE 43:11 When they are ashamed of all that they have done, make known to them the design of the temple, its pattern, its exits and entrances, and its whole design – all its statutes, its entire design, and all its laws; write it all down in their sight, so that they may observe its entire design and all its statutes and do them.
EZE 43:12 “This is the law of the temple: The entire area on top of the mountain all around will be most holy. Indeed, this is the law of the temple.
EZE 43:13 “And these are the measurements of the altar: Its base is 1¾ feet high, and 1¾ feet wide, and its border nine inches on its edge. This is to be the height of the altar.
EZE 43:14 From the base of the ground to the lower edge is 3½ feet, and the width 1¾ feet; and from the smaller ledge to the larger edge, 7 feet, and the width 1¾ feet;
EZE 43:15 and the altar hearth, 7 feet, and from the altar hearth four horns projecting upward.
EZE 43:16 Now the altar hearth is a perfect square, 21 feet long and 21 feet wide.
EZE 43:17 The ledge is 24½ feet long and 24½ feet wide on four sides; the border around it is 10½ inches, and its surrounding base 1¾ feet. Its steps face east.”
EZE 43:18 Then he said to me: “Son of man, this is what the sovereign Lord says: These are the statutes of the altar: On the day it is built to offer up burnt offerings on it and to sprinkle blood on it,
EZE 43:19 you will give a young bull for a sin offering to the Levitical priests who are descended from Zadok, who approach me to minister to me, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 43:20 You will take some of its blood, and place it on the four horns of the altar, on the four corners of the ledge, and on the border all around; you will cleanse it and make atonement for it.
EZE 43:21 You will also take the bull for the sin offering, and it will be burned in the appointed place in the temple, outside the sanctuary.
EZE 43:22 “On the second day, you will offer a male goat without blemish for a sin offering. They will purify the altar just as they purified it with the bull.
EZE 43:23 When you have finished purifying it, you will offer an unblemished young bull and an unblemished ram from the flock.
EZE 43:24 You will present them before the Lord, and the priests will scatter salt on them and offer them up as a burnt offering to the Lord.
EZE 43:25 “For seven days you will provide every day a goat for a sin offering; a young bull and a ram from the flock, both without blemish, will be provided.
EZE 43:26 For seven days they will make atonement for the altar and cleanse it, so they will consecrate it.
EZE 43:27 When the prescribed period is over, on the eighth day and thereafter the priests will offer up on the altar your burnt offerings and your peace offerings; I will accept you, declares the sovereign Lord.”
EZE 44:1 Then he brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary which faces east, but it was shut.
EZE 44:2 The Lord said to me: “This gate will be shut; it will not be opened, and no one will enter by it. For the Lord, the God of Israel, has entered by it; therefore it will remain shut.
EZE 44:3 Only the prince may sit in it to eat a sacrificial meal before the Lord; he will enter by way of the porch of the gate and will go out by the same way.”
EZE 44:4 Then he brought me by way of the north gate to the front of the temple. As I watched, I noticed the glory of the Lord filling the Lord’s temple, and I threw myself face down.
EZE 44:5 The Lord said to me: “Son of man, pay attention, watch closely and listen carefully to everything I tell you concerning all the statutes of the Lord’s house and all its laws. Pay attention to the entrances to the temple with all the exits of the sanctuary.
EZE 44:6 Say to the rebellious, to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Enough of all your abominable practices, O house of Israel!
EZE 44:7 When you bring foreigners, those uncircumcised in heart and in flesh, into my sanctuary, you desecrate it – even my house – when you offer my food, the fat and the blood. You have broken my covenant by all your abominable practices.
EZE 44:8 You have not kept charge of my holy things, but you have assigned foreigners to keep charge of my sanctuary for you.
EZE 44:9 This is what the sovereign Lord says: No foreigner, who is uncircumcised in heart and flesh among all the foreigners who are among the people of Israel, will enter into my sanctuary.
EZE 44:10 “‘But the Levites who went far from me, straying off from me after their idols when Israel went astray, will be responsible for their sin.
EZE 44:11 Yet they will be ministers in my sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the temple, and serving the temple. They will slaughter the burnt offerings and the sacrifices for the people, and they will stand before them to minister to them.
EZE 44:12 Because they used to minister to them before their idols, and became a sinful obstacle to the house of Israel, consequently I have made a vow concerning them, declares the sovereign Lord, that they will be responsible for their sin.
EZE 44:13 They will not come near me to serve me as priest, nor will they come near any of my holy things, the things which are most sacred. They will bear the shame of the abominable deeds they have committed.
EZE 44:14 Yet I will appoint them to keep charge of the temple, all of its service and all that will be done in it.
EZE 44:15 “‘But the Levitical priests, the descendants of Zadok who kept the charge of my sanctuary when the people of Israel went astray from me, will approach me to minister to me; they will stand before me to offer me the fat and the blood, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 44:16 They will enter my sanctuary, and approach my table to minister to me; they will keep my charge.
EZE 44:17 “‘When they enter the gates of the inner court, they must wear linen garments; they must not have any wool on them when they minister in the inner gates of the court and in the temple.
EZE 44:18 Linen turbans will be on their heads and linen undergarments will be around their waists; they must not bind themselves with anything that causes sweat.
EZE 44:19 When they go out to the outer court to the people, they must remove the garments they were ministering in, and place them in the holy chambers; they must put on other garments so that they will not transmit holiness to the people with their garments.
EZE 44:20 “‘They must not shave their heads nor let their hair grow long; they must only trim their heads.
EZE 44:21 No priest may drink wine when he enters the inner court.
EZE 44:22 They must not marry a widow or a divorcee, but they may marry a virgin from the house of Israel or a widow who is a priest’s widow.
EZE 44:23 Moreover, they will teach my people the difference between the holy and the common, and show them how to distinguish between the ceremonially unclean and the clean.
EZE 44:24 “‘In a controversy they will act as judges; they will judge according to my ordinances. They will keep my laws and my statutes regarding all my appointed festivals and will observe my Sabbaths.
EZE 44:25 “‘They must not come near a dead person or they will be defiled; however, for father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister, they may defile themselves.
EZE 44:26 After a priest has become ceremonially clean, they must count off a period of seven days for him.
EZE 44:27 On the day he enters the sanctuary, into the inner court to serve in the sanctuary, he must offer his sin offering, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 44:28 “‘This will be their inheritance: I am their inheritance, and you must give them no property in Israel; I am their property.
EZE 44:29 They may eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and every devoted thing in Israel will be theirs.
EZE 44:30 The first of all the first fruits and all contributions of any kind will be for the priests; you will also give to the priest the first portion of your dough, so that a blessing may rest on your house.
EZE 44:31 The priests will not eat any bird or animal that has died a natural death or was torn to pieces by a wild animal.
EZE 45:1 “‘When you allot the land as an inheritance, you will offer an allotment to the Lord, a holy portion from the land; the length will be eight and a quarter miles and the width three and one-third miles. This entire area will be holy.
EZE 45:2 Of this area a square 875 feet by 875 feet will be designated for the sanctuary, with 87½ feet set aside for its open space round about.
EZE 45:3 From this measured area you will measure a length of eight and a quarter miles and a width of three and one-third miles; in it will be the sanctuary, the most holy place.
EZE 45:4 It will be a holy portion of the land; it will be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary who approach the Lord to minister to him. It will be a place for their houses and a holy place for the sanctuary.
EZE 45:5 An area eight and a quarter miles in length and three and one-third miles in width will be for the Levites, who minister at the temple, as the place for the cities in which they will live.
EZE 45:6 “‘Alongside the portion set apart as the holy allotment, you will allot for the city an area one and two-thirds miles wide and eight and a quarter miles long; it will be for the whole house of Israel.
EZE 45:7 “‘For the prince there will be land on both sides of the holy allotment and the allotted city, alongside the holy allotment and the allotted city, on the west side and on the east side; it will be comparable in length to one of the portions, from the west border to the east border
EZE 45:8 of the land. This will be his property in Israel. My princes will no longer oppress my people, but the land will be allotted to the house of Israel according to their tribes.
EZE 45:9 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: Enough, you princes of Israel! Put away violence and destruction, and do what is just and right. Put an end to your evictions of my people, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 45:10 You must use just balances, a just dry measure (an ephah), and a just liquid measure (a bath).
EZE 45:11 The dry and liquid measures will be the same, the bath will contain a tenth of a homer, and the ephah a tenth of a homer; the homer will be the standard measure.
EZE 45:12 The shekel will be twenty gerahs. Sixty shekels will be a mina for you.
EZE 45:13 “‘This is the offering you must offer: a sixth of an ephah from a homer of wheat; a sixth of an ephah from a homer of barley,
EZE 45:14 and as the prescribed portion of olive oil, one tenth of a bath from each kor (which is ten baths or a homer, for ten baths make a homer);
EZE 45:15 and one sheep from each flock of two hundred, from the watered places of Israel, for a grain offering, burnt offering, and peace offering, to make atonement for them, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 45:16 All the people of the land will contribute to this offering for the prince of Israel.
EZE 45:17 It will be the duty of the prince to provide the burnt offerings, the grain offering, and the drink offering at festivals, on the new moons and Sabbaths, at all the appointed feasts of the house of Israel; he will provide the sin offering, the grain offering, the burnt offering, and the peace offerings to make atonement for the house of Israel.
EZE 45:18 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: In the first month, on the first day of the month, you must take an unblemished young bull and purify the sanctuary.
EZE 45:19 The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering and place it on the doorpost of the temple, on the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on the doorpost of the gate of the inner court.
EZE 45:20 This is what you must do on the seventh day of the month for anyone who sins inadvertently or through ignorance; so you will make atonement for the temple.
EZE 45:21 “‘In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, you will celebrate the Passover, and for seven days bread made without yeast will be eaten.
EZE 45:22 On that day the prince will provide for himself and for all the people of the land a bull for a sin offering.
EZE 45:23 And during the seven days of the feast he will provide as a burnt offering to the Lord seven bulls and seven rams, all without blemish, on each of the seven days, and a male goat daily for a sin offering.
EZE 45:24 He will provide as a grain offering an ephah for each bull, an ephah for each ram, and a gallon of olive oil for each ephah of grain.
EZE 45:25 In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the month, at the feast, he will make the same provisions for the sin offering, burnt offering, and grain offering, and for the olive oil, for the seven days.
EZE 46:1 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: The gate of the inner court that faces east will be closed six working days, but on the Sabbath day it will be opened and on the day of the new moon it will be opened.
EZE 46:2 The prince will enter by way of the porch of the gate from the outside, and will stand by the doorpost of the gate. The priests will provide his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he will bow down at the threshold of the gate and then go out. But the gate will not be closed until evening.
EZE 46:3 The people of the land will bow down at the entrance of that gate before the Lord on the Sabbaths and on the new moons.
EZE 46:4 The burnt offering which the prince will offer to the Lord on the Sabbath day will be six unblemished lambs and one unblemished ram.
EZE 46:5 The grain offering will be an ephah with the ram, and the grain offering with the lambs will be as much as he is able to give, and a gallon of olive oil with an ephah.
EZE 46:6 On the day of the new moon he will offer an unblemished young bull, and six lambs and a ram, all without blemish.
EZE 46:7 He will provide a grain offering: an ephah with the bull and an ephah with the ram, and with the lambs as much as he wishes, and a gallon of olive oil with each ephah of grain.
EZE 46:8 When the prince enters, he will come by way of the porch of the gate and will go out the same way.
EZE 46:9 “‘When the people of the land come before the Lord at the appointed feasts, whoever enters by way of the north gate to worship will go out by way of the south gate; whoever enters by way of the south gate will go out by way of the north gate. No one will return by way of the gate they entered but will go out straight ahead.
EZE 46:10 When they come in, the prince will come in with them, and when they go out, he will go out.
EZE 46:11 “‘At the festivals and at the appointed feasts the grain offering will be an ephah with the bull and an ephah with the ram, and with the lambs as much as one is able, and a gallon of olive oil with each ephah of grain.
EZE 46:12 When the prince provides a freewill offering, a burnt offering, or peace offerings as a voluntary offering to the Lord, the gate facing east will be opened for him, and he will provide his burnt offering and his peace offerings just as he did on the Sabbath. Then he will go out, and the gate will be closed after he goes out.
EZE 46:13 “‘You will provide a lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering daily to the Lord; morning by morning he will provide it.
EZE 46:14 And you will provide a grain offering with it morning by morning, a sixth of an ephah, and a third of a gallon of olive oil to moisten the choice flour, as a grain offering to the Lord; this is a perpetual statute.
EZE 46:15 Thus they will provide the lamb, the grain offering, and the olive oil morning by morning, as a perpetual burnt offering.
EZE 46:16 “‘This is what the sovereign Lord says: If the prince should give a gift to one of his sons as his inheritance, it will belong to his sons, it is their property by inheritance.
EZE 46:17 But if he gives a gift from his inheritance to one of his servants, it will be his until the year of liberty; then it will revert to the prince. His inheritance will only remain with his sons.
EZE 46:18 The prince will not take away any of the people’s inheritance by oppressively removing them from their property. He will give his sons an inheritance from his own possessions so that my people will not be scattered, each from his own property.’”
EZE 46:19 Then he brought me through the entrance, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers for the priests which faced north. There I saw a place at the extreme western end.
EZE 46:20 He said to me, “This is the place where the priests will boil the guilt offering and the sin offering, and where they will bake the grain offering, so that they do not bring them out to the outer court to transmit holiness to the people.”
EZE 46:21 Then he brought me out to the outer court and led me past the four corners of the court, and I noticed that in every corner of the court there was a court.
EZE 46:22 In the four corners of the court were small courts, 70 feet in length and 52½ feet in width; the four were all the same size.
EZE 46:23 There was a row of masonry around each of the four courts, and places for boiling offerings were made under the rows all around.
EZE 46:24 Then he said to me, “These are the houses for boiling, where the ministers of the temple boil the sacrifices of the people.”
EZE 47:1 Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple. I noticed that water was flowing from under the threshold of the temple toward the east (for the temple faced east). The water was flowing down from under the right side of the temple, from south of the altar.
EZE 47:2 He led me out by way of the north gate and brought me around the outside of the outer gate that faces toward the east; I noticed that the water was trickling out from the south side.
EZE 47:3 When the man went out toward the east with a measuring line in his hand, he measured 1,750 feet, and then he led me through water, which was ankle deep.
EZE 47:4 Again he measured 1,750 feet and led me through the water, which was now knee deep. Once more he measured 1,750 feet and led me through the water, which was waist deep.
EZE 47:5 Again he measured 1,750 feet and it was a river I could not cross, for the water had risen; it was deep enough to swim in, a river that could not be crossed.
EZE 47:6 He said to me, “Son of man, have you seen this?” Then he led me back to the bank of the river.
EZE 47:7 When I had returned, I noticed a vast number of trees on the banks of the river, on both sides.
EZE 47:8 He said to me, “These waters go out toward the eastern region and flow down into the Arabah; when they enter the Dead Sea, where the sea is stagnant, the waters become fresh.
EZE 47:9 Every living creature which swarms where the river flows will live; there will be many fish, for these waters flow there. It will become fresh and everything will live where the river flows.
EZE 47:10 Fishermen will stand beside it; from Engedi to En-eglaim they will spread nets. They will catch many kinds of fish, like the fish of the Great Sea.
EZE 47:11 But its swamps and its marshes will not become fresh; they will remain salty.
EZE 47:12 On both sides of the river’s banks, every kind of tree will grow for food. Their leaves will not wither nor will their fruit fail, but they will bear fruit every month, because their water source flows from the sanctuary. Their fruit will be for food and their leaves for healing.”
EZE 47:13 This is what the sovereign Lord says: “Here are the borders you will observe as you allot the land to the twelve tribes of Israel. (Joseph will have two portions.)
EZE 47:14 You must divide it equally just as I vowed to give it to your forefathers; this land will be assigned as your inheritance.
EZE 47:15 “This will be the border of the land: On the north side, from the Great Sea by way of Hethlon to the entrance of Zedad;
EZE 47:16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath, as far as Hazer-hattikon, which is on the border of Hauran.
EZE 47:17 The border will run from the sea to Hazar-enan, at the border of Damascus, and on the north is the border of Hamath. This is the north side.
EZE 47:18 On the east side, between Hauran and Damascus, and between Gilead and the land of Israel, will be the Jordan. You will measure from the border to the eastern sea. This is the east side.
EZE 47:19 On the south side it will run from Tamar to the waters of Meribath Kadesh, the river, to the Great Sea. This is the south side.
EZE 47:20 On the west side the Great Sea will be the boundary to a point opposite Lebo-hamath. This is the west side.
EZE 47:21 “This is how you will divide this land for yourselves among the tribes of Israel.
EZE 47:22 You must allot it as an inheritance among yourselves and for the foreigners who reside among you, who have fathered sons among you. You must treat them as native-born among the people of Israel; they will be allotted an inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.
EZE 47:23 In whatever tribe the foreigner resides, there you will give him his inheritance,” declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 48:1 “These are the names of the tribes: From the northern end beside the road of Hethlon to Lebo-hamath, as far as Hazar-enan (which is on the border of Damascus, toward the north beside Hamath), extending from the east side to the west, Dan will have one portion.
EZE 48:2 Next to the border of Dan, from the east side to the west, Asher will have one portion.
EZE 48:3 Next to the border of Asher from the east side to the west, Naphtali will have one portion.
EZE 48:4 Next to the border of Naphtali from the east side to the west, Manasseh will have one portion.
EZE 48:5 Next to the border of Manasseh from the east side to the west, Ephraim will have one portion.
EZE 48:6 Next to the border of Ephraim from the east side to the west, Reuben will have one portion.
EZE 48:7 Next to the border of Reuben from the east side to the west, Judah will have one portion.
EZE 48:8 “Next to the border of Judah from the east side to the west will be the allotment you must set apart. It is to be eight and a quarter miles wide, and the same length as one of the tribal portions, from the east side to the west; the sanctuary will be in the middle of it.
EZE 48:9 The allotment you set apart to the Lord will be eight and a quarter miles in length and three and one-third miles in width.
EZE 48:10 These will be the allotments for the holy portion: for the priests, toward the north eight and a quarter miles in length, toward the west three and one-third miles in width, toward the east three and one-third miles in width, and toward the south eight and a quarter miles in length; the sanctuary of the Lord will be in the middle.
EZE 48:11 This will be for the priests who are set apart from the descendants of Zadok who kept my charge and did not go astray when the people of Israel strayed off, like the Levites did.
EZE 48:12 It will be their portion from the allotment of the land, a most holy place, next to the border of the Levites.
EZE 48:13 “Alongside the border of the priests, the Levites will have an allotment eight and a quarter miles in length and three and one-third miles in width. The whole length will be eight and a quarter miles and the width three and one-third miles.
EZE 48:14 They must not sell or exchange any of it; they must not transfer this choice portion of land, for it is set apart to the Lord.
EZE 48:15 “The remainder, one and two-thirds miles in width and eight and a quarter miles in length, will be for common use by the city, for houses and for open space. The city will be in the middle of it;
EZE 48:16 these will be its measurements: The north side will be one and one-half miles, the south side one and one-half miles, the east side one and one-half miles, and the west side one and one-half miles.
EZE 48:17 The city will have open spaces: On the north there will be 437½ feet, on the south 437½ feet, on the east 437½ feet, and on the west 437½ feet.
EZE 48:18 The remainder of the length alongside the holy allotment will be three and one-third miles to the east and three and one-third miles toward the west, and it will be beside the holy allotment. Its produce will be for food for the workers of the city.
EZE 48:19 The workers of the city from all the tribes of Israel will cultivate it.
EZE 48:20 The whole allotment will be eight and a quarter miles square, you must set apart the holy allotment with the possession of the city.
EZE 48:21 “The rest, on both sides of the holy allotment and the property of the city, will belong to the prince. Extending from the eight and a quarter miles of the holy allotment to the east border, and westward from the eight and a quarter miles to the west border, alongside the portions, it will belong to the prince. The holy allotment and the sanctuary of the temple will be in the middle of it.
EZE 48:22 The property of the Levites and of the city will be in the middle of that which belongs to the prince. The portion between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin will be for the prince.
EZE 48:23 “As for the rest of the tribes: From the east side to the west side, Benjamin will have one portion.
EZE 48:24 Next to the border of Benjamin, from the east side to the west side, Simeon will have one portion.
EZE 48:25 Next to the border of Simeon, from the east side to the west side, Issachar will have one portion.
EZE 48:26 Next to the border of Issachar, from the east side to the west side, Zebulun will have one portion.
EZE 48:27 Next to the border of Zebulun, from the east side to the west side, Gad will have one portion.
EZE 48:28 Next to the border of Gad, at the south side, the border will run from Tamar to the waters of Meribath Kadesh, to the Stream of Egypt and on to the Great Sea.
EZE 48:29 This is the land which you will allot to the tribes of Israel, and these are their portions, declares the sovereign Lord.
EZE 48:30 “These are the exits of the city: On the north side, one and one-half miles by measure,
EZE 48:31 the gates of the city will be named for the tribes of Israel; there will be three gates to the north: one gate for Reuben, one gate for Judah, and one gate for Levi.
EZE 48:32 On the east side, one and one-half miles in length, there will be three gates: one gate for Joseph, one gate for Benjamin, and one gate for Dan.
EZE 48:33 On the south side, one and one-half miles by measure, there will be three gates: one gate for Simeon, one gate for Issachar, and one gate for Zebulun.
EZE 48:34 On the west side, one and one-half miles in length, there will be three gates: one gate for Gad, one gate for Asher, and one gate for Naphtali.
EZE 48:35 The circumference of the city will be six miles. The name of the city from that day forward will be: ‘The Lord Is There.’”
DAN 1:1 In the third year of the reign of King Jehoiakim of Judah, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon advanced against Jerusalem and laid it under siege.
DAN 1:2 Now the Lord delivered King Jehoiakim of Judah into his power, along with some of the vessels of the temple of God. He brought them to the land of Babylonia to the temple of his god and put the vessels in the treasury of his god.
DAN 1:3 The king commanded Ashpenaz, who was in charge of his court officials, to choose some of the Israelites who were of royal and noble descent –
DAN 1:4 young men in whom there was no physical defect and who were handsome, well versed in all kinds of wisdom, well educated and having keen insight, and who were capable of entering the king’s royal service – and to teach them the literature and language of the Babylonians.
DAN 1:5 So the king assigned them a daily ration from his royal delicacies and from the wine he himself drank. They were to be trained for the next three years. At the end of that time they were to enter the king’s service.
DAN 1:6 As it turned out, among these young men were some from Judah: Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.
DAN 1:7 But the overseer of the court officials renamed them. He gave Daniel the name Belteshazzar, Hananiah he named Shadrach, Mishael he named Meshach, and Azariah he named Abednego.
DAN 1:8 But Daniel made up his mind that he would not defile himself with the royal delicacies or the royal wine. He therefore asked the overseer of the court officials for permission not to defile himself.
DAN 1:9 Then God made the overseer of the court officials sympathetic to Daniel.
DAN 1:10 But he responded to Daniel, “I fear my master the king. He is the one who has decided your food and drink. What would happen if he saw that you looked malnourished in comparison to the other young men your age? If that happened, you would endanger my life with the king!”
DAN 1:11 Daniel then spoke to the warden whom the overseer of the court officials had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:
DAN 1:12 “Please test your servants for ten days by providing us with some vegetables to eat and water to drink.
DAN 1:13 Then compare our appearance with that of the young men who are eating the royal delicacies; deal with us in light of what you see.”
DAN 1:14 So the warden agreed to their proposal and tested them for ten days.
DAN 1:15 At the end of the ten days their appearance was better and their bodies were healthier than all the young men who had been eating the royal delicacies.
DAN 1:16 So the warden removed the delicacies and the wine from their diet and gave them a diet of vegetables instead.
DAN 1:17 Now as for these four young men, God endowed them with knowledge and skill in all sorts of literature and wisdom – and Daniel had insight into all kinds of visions and dreams.
DAN 1:18 When the time appointed by the king arrived, the overseer of the court officials brought them into Nebuchadnezzar’s presence.
DAN 1:19 When the king spoke with them, he did not find among the entire group anyone like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, or Azariah. So they entered the king’s service.
DAN 1:20 In every matter of wisdom and insight the king asked them about, he found them to be ten times better than any of the magicians and astrologers that were in his entire empire.
DAN 1:21 Now Daniel lived on until the first year of Cyrus the king.
DAN 2:1 In the second year of his reign Nebuchadnezzar had many dreams. His mind was disturbed and he suffered from insomnia.
DAN 2:2 The king issued an order to summon the magicians, astrologers, sorcerers, and wise men in order to explain his dreams to him. So they came and awaited the king’s instructions.
DAN 2:3 The king told them, “I have had a dream, and I am anxious to understand the dream.”
DAN 2:4 The wise men replied to the king: [What follows is in Aramaic ] “O king, live forever! Tell your servants the dream, and we will disclose its interpretation.”
DAN 2:5 The king replied to the wise men, “My decision is firm. If you do not inform me of both the dream and its interpretation, you will be dismembered and your homes reduced to rubble!
DAN 2:6 But if you can disclose the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts, a reward, and considerable honor. So disclose to me the dream and its interpretation!”
DAN 2:7 They again replied, “Let the king inform us of the dream; then we will disclose its interpretation.”
DAN 2:8 The king replied, “I know for sure that you are attempting to gain time, because you see that my decision is firm.
DAN 2:9 If you don’t inform me of the dream, there is only one thing that is going to happen to you. For you have agreed among yourselves to report to me something false and deceitful until such time as things might change. So tell me the dream, and I will have confidence that you can disclose its interpretation.”
DAN 2:10 The wise men replied to the king, “There is no man on earth who is able to disclose the king’s secret, for no king, regardless of his position and power, has ever requested such a thing from any magician, astrologer, or wise man.
DAN 2:11 What the king is asking is too difficult, and no one exists who can disclose it to the king, except for the gods – but they don’t live among mortals!”
DAN 2:12 Because of this the king got furiously angry and gave orders to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
DAN 2:13 So a decree went out, and the wise men were about to be executed. They also sought Daniel and his friends so that they could be executed.
DAN 2:14 Then Daniel spoke with prudent counsel to Arioch, who was in charge of the king’s executioners and who had gone out to execute the wise men of Babylon.
DAN 2:15 He inquired of Arioch the king’s deputy, “Why is the decree from the king so urgent?” Then Arioch informed Daniel about the matter.
DAN 2:16 So Daniel went in and requested the king to grant him time, that he might disclose the interpretation to the king.
DAN 2:17 Then Daniel went to his home and informed his friends Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah of the matter.
DAN 2:18 He asked them to pray for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this mystery so that he and his friends would not be destroyed along with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
DAN 2:19 Then in a night vision the mystery was revealed to Daniel. So Daniel praised the God of heaven,
DAN 2:20 saying, “Let the name of God be praised forever and ever, for wisdom and power belong to him.
DAN 2:21 He changes times and seasons, deposing some kings and establishing others. He gives wisdom to the wise; he imparts knowledge to those with understanding;
DAN 2:22 he reveals deep and hidden things. He knows what is in the darkness, and light resides with him.
DAN 2:23 O God of my fathers, I acknowledge and glorify you, for you have bestowed wisdom and power on me. Now you have enabled me to understand what I requested from you. For you have enabled me to understand the king’s dilemma.”
DAN 2:24 Then Daniel went in to see Arioch (whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon). He came and said to him, “Don’t destroy the wise men of Babylon! Escort me to the king, and I will disclose the interpretation to him!”
DAN 2:25 So Arioch quickly ushered Daniel into the king’s presence, saying to him, “I have found a man from the captives of Judah who can make known the interpretation to the king.”
DAN 2:26 The king then asked Daniel (whose name was also Belteshazzar), “Are you able to make known to me the dream that I saw, as well as its interpretation?”
DAN 2:27 Daniel replied to the king, “The mystery that the king is asking about is such that no wise men, astrologers, magicians, or diviners can possibly disclose it to the king.
DAN 2:28 However, there is a God in heaven who reveals mysteries, and he has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar what will happen in the times to come. The dream and the visions you had while lying on your bed are as follows.
DAN 2:29 “As for you, O king, while you were in your bed your thoughts turned to future things. The revealer of mysteries has made known to you what will take place.
DAN 2:30 As for me, this mystery was revealed to me not because I possess more wisdom than any other living person, but so that the king may understand the interpretation and comprehend the thoughts of your mind.
DAN 2:31 “You, O king, were watching as a great statue – one of impressive size and extraordinary brightness – was standing before you. Its appearance caused alarm.
DAN 2:32 As for that statue, its head was of fine gold, its chest and arms were of silver, its belly and thighs were of bronze.
DAN 2:33 Its legs were of iron; its feet were partly of iron and partly of clay.
DAN 2:34 You were watching as a stone was cut out, but not by human hands. It struck the statue on its iron and clay feet, breaking them in pieces.
DAN 2:35 Then the iron, clay, bronze, silver, and gold were broken in pieces without distinction and became like chaff from the summer threshing floors that the wind carries away. Not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the statue became a large mountain that filled the entire earth.
DAN 2:36 This was the dream. Now we will set forth before the king its interpretation.
DAN 2:37 “You, O king, are the king of kings. The God of heaven has granted you sovereignty, power, strength, and honor.
DAN 2:38 Wherever human beings, wild animals, and birds of the sky live – he has given them into your power. He has given you authority over them all. You are the head of gold.
DAN 2:39 Now after you another kingdom will arise, one inferior to yours. Then a third kingdom, one of bronze, will rule in all the earth.
DAN 2:40 Then there will be a fourth kingdom, one strong like iron. Just like iron breaks in pieces and shatters everything, and as iron breaks in pieces all of these metals, so it will break in pieces and crush the others.
DAN 2:41 In that you were seeing feet and toes partly of wet clay and partly of iron, so this will be a divided kingdom. Some of the strength of iron will be in it, for you saw iron mixed with wet clay.
DAN 2:42 In that the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, the latter stages of this kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile.
DAN 2:43 And in that you saw iron mixed with wet clay, so people will be mixed with one another without adhering to one another, just as iron does not mix with clay.
DAN 2:44 In the days of those kings the God of heaven will raise up an everlasting kingdom that will not be destroyed and a kingdom that will not be left to another people. It will break in pieces and bring about the demise of all these kingdoms. But it will stand forever.
DAN 2:45 You saw that a stone was cut from a mountain, but not by human hands; it smashed the iron, bronze, clay, silver, and gold into pieces. The great God has made known to the king what will occur in the future. The dream is certain, and its interpretation is reliable.”
DAN 2:46 Then King Nebuchadnezzar bowed down with his face to the ground and paid homage to Daniel. He gave orders to offer sacrifice and incense to him.
DAN 2:47 The king replied to Daniel, “Certainly your God is a God of gods and Lord of kings and revealer of mysteries, for you were able to reveal this mystery!”
DAN 2:48 Then the king elevated Daniel to high position and bestowed on him many marvelous gifts. He granted him authority over the entire province of Babylon and made him the main prefect over all the wise men of Babylon.
DAN 2:49 And at Daniel’s request, the king appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego over the administration of the province of Babylon. Daniel himself served in the king’s court.
DAN 3:1 King Nebuchadnezzar had a golden statue made. It was ninety feet tall and nine feet wide. He erected it on the plain of Dura in the province of Babylon.
DAN 3:2 Then King Nebuchadnezzar sent out a summons to assemble the satraps, prefects, governors, counselors, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the other authorities of the province to attend the dedication of the statue that he had erected.
DAN 3:3 So the satraps, prefects, governors, counselors, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the other provincial authorities assembled for the dedication of the statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had erected. They were standing in front of the statue that Nebuchadnezzar had erected.
DAN 3:4 Then the herald made a loud proclamation: “To you, O peoples, nations, and language groups, the following command is given:
DAN 3:5 When you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, trigon, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music, you must bow down and pay homage to the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar has erected.
DAN 3:6 Whoever does not bow down and pay homage will immediately be thrown into the midst of a furnace of blazing fire!”
DAN 3:7 Therefore when they all heard the sound of the horn, flute, zither, trigon, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music, all the peoples, nations, and language groups began bowing down and paying homage to the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had erected.
DAN 3:8 Now at that time certain Chaldeans came forward and brought malicious accusations against the Jews.
DAN 3:9 They said to King Nebuchadnezzar, “O king, live forever!
DAN 3:10 You have issued an edict, O king, that everyone must bow down and pay homage to the golden statue when they hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, trigon, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music.
DAN 3:11 And whoever does not bow down and pay homage must be thrown into the midst of a furnace of blazing fire.
DAN 3:12 But there are Jewish men whom you appointed over the administration of the province of Babylon – Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego – and these men have not shown proper respect to you, O king. They don’t serve your gods and they don’t pay homage to the golden statue that you have erected.”
DAN 3:13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in a fit of rage demanded that they bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego before him. So they brought them before the king.
DAN 3:14 Nebuchadnezzar said to them, “Is it true, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you don’t serve my gods and that you don’t pay homage to the golden statue that I erected?
DAN 3:15 Now if you are ready, when you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, trigon, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music, you must bow down and pay homage to the statue that I had made. If you don’t pay homage to it, you will immediately be thrown into the midst of the furnace of blazing fire. Now, who is that god who can rescue you from my power?”
DAN 3:16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego replied to King Nebuchadnezzar, “We do not need to give you a reply concerning this.
DAN 3:17 If our God whom we are serving exists, he is able to rescue us from the furnace of blazing fire, and he will rescue us, O king, from your power as well.
DAN 3:18 But if not, let it be known to you, O king, that we don’t serve your gods, and we will not pay homage to the golden statue that you have erected.”
DAN 3:19 Then Nebuchadnezzar was filled with rage, and his disposition changed toward Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He gave orders to heat the furnace seven times hotter than it was normally heated.
DAN 3:20 He ordered strong soldiers in his army to tie up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego and to throw them into the furnace of blazing fire.
DAN 3:21 So those men were tied up while still wearing their cloaks, trousers, turbans, and other clothes, and were thrown into the furnace of blazing fire.
DAN 3:22 But since the king’s command was so urgent, and the furnace was so excessively hot, the men who escorted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were killed by the leaping flames.
DAN 3:23 But those three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell into the furnace of blazing fire while still securely bound.
DAN 3:24 Then King Nebuchadnezzar was startled and quickly got up. He said to his ministers, “Wasn’t it three men that we tied up and threw into the fire?” They replied to the king, “For sure, O king.”
DAN 3:25 He answered, “But I see four men, untied and walking around in the midst of the fire! No harm has come to them! And the appearance of the fourth is like that of a god!”
DAN 3:26 Then Nebuchadnezzar approached the door of the furnace of blazing fire. He called out, “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the most high God, come out! Come here!” Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego emerged from the fire.
DAN 3:27 Once the satraps, prefects, governors, and ministers of the king had gathered around, they saw that those men were physically unharmed by the fire. The hair of their heads was not singed, nor were their trousers damaged. Not even the smell of fire was to be found on them!
DAN 3:28 Nebuchadnezzar exclaimed, “Praised be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent forth his angel and has rescued his servants who trusted in him, ignoring the edict of the king and giving up their bodies rather than serve or pay homage to any god other than their God!
DAN 3:29 I hereby decree that any people, nation, or language group that blasphemes the god of Shadrach, Meshach, or Abednego will be dismembered and his home reduced to rubble! For there exists no other god who can deliver in this way.”
DAN 3:30 Then Nebuchadnezzar promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon.
DAN 4:1 “King Nebuchadnezzar, to all peoples, nations, and language groups that live in all the land: Peace and prosperity!
DAN 4:2 I am delighted to tell you about the signs and wonders that the most high God has done for me.
DAN 4:3 “How great are his signs! How mighty are his wonders! His kingdom will last forever, and his authority continues from one generation to the next.”
DAN 4:4 I, Nebuchadnezzar, was relaxing in my home, living luxuriously in my palace.
DAN 4:5 I saw a dream that frightened me badly. The things I imagined while lying on my bed – these visions of my mind – were terrifying me.
DAN 4:6 So I issued an order for all the wise men of Babylon to be brought before me so that they could make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
DAN 4:7 When the magicians, astrologers, wise men, and diviners entered, I recounted the dream for them. But they were unable to make known its interpretation to me.
DAN 4:8 Later Daniel entered (whose name is Belteshazzar after the name of my god, and in whom there is a spirit of the holy gods). I recounted the dream for him as well,
DAN 4:9 saying, “Belteshazzar, chief of the magicians, in whom I know there to be a spirit of the holy gods and whom no mystery baffles, consider my dream that I saw and set forth its interpretation!
DAN 4:10 Here are the visions of my mind while I was on my bed. While I was watching, there was a tree in the middle of the land. It was enormously tall.
DAN 4:11 The tree grew large and strong. Its top reached far into the sky; it could be seen from the borders of all the land.
DAN 4:12 Its foliage was attractive and its fruit plentiful; on it there was food enough for all. Under it the wild animals used to seek shade, and in its branches the birds of the sky used to nest. All creatures used to feed themselves from it.
DAN 4:13 While I was watching in my mind’s visions on my bed, a holy sentinel came down from heaven.
DAN 4:14 He called out loudly as follows: ‘Chop down the tree and lop off its branches! Strip off its foliage and scatter its fruit! Let the animals flee from under it and the birds from its branches!
DAN 4:15 But leave its taproot in the ground, with a band of iron and bronze around it surrounded by the grass of the field. Let it become damp with the dew of the sky, and let it live with the animals in the grass of the land.
DAN 4:16 Let his mind be altered from that of a human being, and let an animal’s mind be given to him, and let seven periods of time go by for him.
DAN 4:17 This announcement is by the decree of the sentinels; this decision is by the pronouncement of the holy ones, so that those who are alive may understand that the Most High has authority over human kingdoms, and he bestows them on whomever he wishes. He establishes over them even the lowliest of human beings.’
DAN 4:18 “This is the dream that I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw. Now you, Belteshazzar, declare its interpretation, for none of the wise men in my kingdom are able to make known to me the interpretation. But you can do so, for a spirit of the holy gods is in you.”
DAN 4:19 Then Daniel (whose name is also Belteshazzar) was upset for a brief time; his thoughts were alarming him. The king said, “Belteshazzar, don’t let the dream and its interpretation alarm you.” But Belteshazzar replied, “Sir, if only the dream were for your enemies and its interpretation applied to your adversaries!
DAN 4:20 The tree that you saw that grew large and strong, whose top reached to the sky, and which could be seen in all the land,
DAN 4:21 whose foliage was attractive and its fruit plentiful, and from which there was food available for all, under whose branches wild animals used to live, and in whose branches birds of the sky used to nest –
DAN 4:22 it is you, O king! For you have become great and strong. Your greatness is such that it reaches to heaven, and your authority to the ends of the earth.
DAN 4:23 As for the king seeing a holy sentinel coming down from heaven and saying, ‘Chop down the tree and destroy it, but leave its taproot in the ground, with a band of iron and bronze around it, surrounded by the grass of the field. Let it become damp with the dew of the sky, and let it live with the wild animals, until seven periods of time go by for him’ –
DAN 4:24 this is the interpretation, O king! It is the decision of the Most High that this has happened to my lord the king.
DAN 4:25 You will be driven from human society, and you will live with the wild animals. You will be fed grass like oxen, and you will become damp with the dew of the sky. Seven periods of time will pass by for you, before you understand that the Most High is ruler over human kingdoms and gives them to whomever he wishes.
DAN 4:26 They said to leave the taproot of the tree, for your kingdom will be restored to you when you come to understand that heaven rules.
DAN 4:27 Therefore, O king, may my advice be pleasing to you. Break away from your sins by doing what is right, and from your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Perhaps your prosperity will be prolonged.”
DAN 4:28 Now all of this happened to King Nebuchadnezzar.
DAN 4:29 After twelve months, he happened to be walking around on the battlements of the royal palace of Babylon.
DAN 4:30 The king uttered these words: “Is this not the great Babylon that I have built for a royal residence by my own mighty strength and for my majestic honor?”
DAN 4:31 While these words were still on the king’s lips, a voice came down from heaven: “It is hereby announced to you, King Nebuchadnezzar, that your kingdom has been removed from you!
DAN 4:32 You will be driven from human society, and you will live with the wild animals. You will be fed grass like oxen, and seven periods of time will pass by for you before you understand that the Most High is ruler over human kingdoms and gives them to whomever he wishes.”
DAN 4:33 Now in that very moment this pronouncement about Nebuchadnezzar came true. He was driven from human society, he ate grass like oxen, and his body became damp with the dew of the sky, until his hair became long like an eagle’s feathers, and his nails like a bird’s claws.
DAN 4:34 But at the end of the appointed time I, Nebuchadnezzar, looked up toward heaven, and my sanity returned to me. I extolled the Most High, and I praised and glorified the one who lives forever. For his authority is an everlasting authority, and his kingdom extends from one generation to the next.
DAN 4:35 All the inhabitants of the earth are regarded as nothing. He does as he wishes with the army of heaven and with those who inhabit the earth. No one slaps his hand and says to him, ‘What have you done?’
DAN 4:36 At that time my sanity returned to me. I was restored to the honor of my kingdom, and my splendor returned to me. My ministers and my nobles were seeking me out, and I was reinstated over my kingdom. I became even greater than before.
DAN 4:37 Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and exalt and glorify the King of heaven, for all his deeds are right and his ways are just. He is able to bring down those who live in pride.
DAN 5:1 King Belshazzar prepared a great banquet for a thousand of his nobles, and he was drinking wine in front of them all.
DAN 5:2 While under the influence of the wine, Belshazzar issued an order to bring in the gold and silver vessels – the ones that Nebuchadnezzar his father had confiscated from the temple in Jerusalem – so that the king and his nobles, together with his wives and his concubines, could drink from them.
DAN 5:3 So they brought the gold and silver vessels that had been confiscated from the temple, the house of God in Jerusalem, and the king and his nobles, together with his wives and concubines, drank from them.
DAN 5:4 As they drank wine, they praised the gods of gold and silver, bronze, iron, wood, and stone.
DAN 5:5 At that very moment the fingers of a human hand appeared and wrote on the plaster of the royal palace wall, opposite the lampstand. The king was watching the back of the hand that was writing.
DAN 5:6 Then all the color drained from the king’s face and he became alarmed. The joints of his hips gave way, and his knees began knocking together.
DAN 5:7 The king called out loudly to summon the astrologers, wise men, and diviners. The king proclaimed to the wise men of Babylon that anyone who could read this inscription and disclose its interpretation would be clothed in purple and have a golden collar placed on his neck and be third ruler in the kingdom.
DAN 5:8 So all the king’s wise men came in, but they were unable to read the writing or to make known its interpretation to the king.
DAN 5:9 Then King Belshazzar was very terrified, and he was visibly shaken. His nobles were completely dumbfounded.
DAN 5:10 Due to the noise caused by the king and his nobles, the queen mother then entered the banquet room. She said, “O king, live forever! Don’t be alarmed! Don’t be shaken!
DAN 5:11 There is a man in your kingdom who has within him a spirit of the holy gods. In the days of your father, he proved to have insight, discernment, and wisdom like that of the gods. King Nebuchadnezzar your father appointed him chief of the magicians, astrologers, wise men, and diviners.
DAN 5:12 Thus there was found in this man Daniel, whom the king renamed Belteshazzar, an extraordinary spirit, knowledge, and skill to interpret dreams, solve riddles, and decipher knotty problems. Now summon Daniel, and he will disclose the interpretation.”
DAN 5:13 So Daniel was brought in before the king. The king said to Daniel, “Are you that Daniel who is one of the captives of Judah, whom my father the king brought from Judah?
DAN 5:14 I have heard about you, how there is a spirit of the gods in you, and how you have insight, discernment, and extraordinary wisdom.
DAN 5:15 Now the wise men and astrologers were brought before me to read this writing and make known to me its interpretation. But they were unable to disclose the interpretation of the message.
DAN 5:16 However, I have heard that you are able to provide interpretations and to decipher knotty problems. Now if you are able to read this writing and make known to me its interpretation, you will wear purple and have a golden collar around your neck and be third ruler in the kingdom.”
DAN 5:17 But Daniel replied to the king, “Keep your gifts, and give your rewards to someone else! However, I will read the writing for the king and make known its interpretation.
DAN 5:18 As for you, O king, the most high God bestowed on your father Nebuchadnezzar a kingdom, greatness, honor, and majesty.
DAN 5:19 Due to the greatness that he bestowed on him, all peoples, nations, and language groups were trembling with fear before him. He killed whom he wished, he spared whom he wished, he exalted whom he wished, and he brought low whom he wished.
DAN 5:20 And when his mind became arrogant and his spirit filled with pride, he was deposed from his royal throne and his honor was removed from him.
DAN 5:21 He was driven from human society, his mind was changed to that of an animal, he lived with the wild donkeys, he was fed grass like oxen, and his body became damp with the dew of the sky, until he came to understand that the most high God rules over human kingdoms, and he appoints over them whomever he wishes.
DAN 5:22 “But you, his son Belshazzar, have not humbled yourself, although you knew all this.
DAN 5:23 Instead, you have exalted yourself against the Lord of heaven. You brought before you the vessels from his temple, and you and your nobles, together with your wives and concubines, drank wine from them. You praised the gods of silver, gold, bronze, iron, wood, and stone – gods that cannot see or hear or comprehend! But you have not glorified the God who has in his control your very breath and all your ways!
DAN 5:24 Therefore the palm of a hand was sent from him, and this writing was inscribed.
DAN 5:25 “This is the writing that was inscribed: MENE, MENE, TEQEL, and PHARSIN.
DAN 5:26 This is the interpretation of the words: As for mene – God has numbered your kingdom’s days and brought it to an end.
DAN 5:27 As for teqel – you are weighed on the balances and found to be lacking.
DAN 5:28 As for peres – your kingdom is divided and given over to the Medes and Persians.”
DAN 5:29 Then, on Belshazzar’s orders, Daniel was clothed in purple, a golden collar was placed around his neck, and he was proclaimed third ruler in the kingdom.
DAN 5:30 And in that very night Belshazzar, the Babylonian king, was killed.
DAN 5:31 So Darius the Mede took control of the kingdom when he was about sixty-two years old.
DAN 6:1 It seemed like a good idea to Darius to appoint over the kingdom 120 satraps who would be in charge of the entire kingdom.
DAN 6:2 Over them would be three supervisors, one of whom was Daniel. These satraps were accountable to them, so that the king’s interests might not incur damage.
DAN 6:3 Now this Daniel was distinguishing himself above the other supervisors and the satraps, for he had an extraordinary spirit. In fact, the king intended to appoint him over the entire kingdom.
DAN 6:4 Consequently the supervisors and satraps were trying to find some pretext against Daniel in connection with administrative matters. But they were unable to find any such damaging evidence, because he was trustworthy and guilty of no negligence or corruption.
DAN 6:5 So these men concluded, “We won’t find any pretext against this man Daniel unless it is in connection with the law of his God.”
DAN 6:6 So these supervisors and satraps came by collusion to the king and said to him, “O King Darius, live forever!
DAN 6:7 To all the supervisors of the kingdom, the prefects, satraps, counselors, and governors it seemed like a good idea for a royal edict to be issued and an interdict to be enforced. For the next thirty days anyone who prays to any god or human other than you, O king, should be thrown into a den of lions.
DAN 6:8 Now let the king issue a written interdict so that it cannot be altered, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be changed.
DAN 6:9 So King Darius issued the written interdict.
DAN 6:10 When Daniel realized that a written decree had been issued, he entered his home, where the windows in his upper room opened toward Jerusalem. Three times daily he was kneeling and offering prayers and thanks to his God just as he had been accustomed to do previously.
DAN 6:11 Then those officials who had gone to the king came by collusion and found Daniel praying and asking for help before his God.
DAN 6:12 So they approached the king and said to him, “Did you not issue an edict to the effect that for the next thirty days anyone who prays to any god or human other than to you, O king, would be thrown into a den of lions?” The king replied, “That is correct, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be changed.”
DAN 6:13 Then they said to the king, “Daniel, who is one of the captives from Judah, pays no attention to you, O king, or to the edict that you issued. Three times daily he offers his prayer.”
DAN 6:14 When the king heard this, he was very upset and began thinking about how he might rescue Daniel. Until late afternoon he was struggling to find a way to rescue him.
DAN 6:15 Then those men came by collusion to the king and said to him, “Recall, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians that no edict or decree that the king issues can be changed.”
DAN 6:16 So the king gave the order, and Daniel was brought and thrown into a den of lions. The king consoled Daniel by saying, “Your God whom you continually serve will rescue you!”
DAN 6:17 Then a stone was brought and placed over the opening to the den. The king sealed it with his signet ring and with those of his nobles so that nothing could be changed with regard to Daniel.
DAN 6:18 Then the king departed to his palace. But he spent the night without eating, and no diversions were brought to him. He was unable to sleep.
DAN 6:19 In the morning, at the earliest sign of daylight, the king got up and rushed to the lions’ den.
DAN 6:20 As he approached the den, he called out to Daniel in a worried voice, “Daniel, servant of the living God, was your God whom you continually serve able to rescue you from the lions?”
DAN 6:21 Then Daniel spoke to the king, “O king, live forever!
DAN 6:22 My God sent his angel and closed the lions’ mouths so that they have not harmed me, because I was found to be innocent before him. Nor have I done any harm to you, O king.”
DAN 6:23 Then the king was delighted and gave an order to haul Daniel up from the den. So Daniel was hauled up out of the den. He had no injury of any kind, because he had trusted in his God.
DAN 6:24 The king gave another order, and those men who had maliciously accused Daniel were brought and thrown into the lions’ den – they, their children, and their wives. They did not even reach the bottom of the den before the lions overpowered them and crushed all their bones.
DAN 6:25 Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations, and language groups who were living in all the land: “Peace and prosperity!
DAN 6:26 I have issued an edict that throughout all the dominion of my kingdom people are to revere and fear the God of Daniel. “For he is the living God; he endures forever. His kingdom will not be destroyed; his authority is forever.
DAN 6:27 He rescues and delivers and performs signs and wonders in the heavens and on the earth. He has rescued Daniel from the power of the lions!”
DAN 6:28 So this Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
DAN 7:1 In the first year of King Belshazzar of Babylon, Daniel had a dream filled with visions while he was lying on his bed. Then he wrote down the dream in summary fashion.
DAN 7:2 Daniel explained: “I was watching in my vision during the night as the four winds of the sky were stirring up the great sea.
DAN 7:3 Then four large beasts came up from the sea; they were different from one another.
DAN 7:4 “The first one was like a lion with eagles’ wings. As I watched, its wings were pulled off and it was lifted up from the ground. It was made to stand on two feet like a human being, and a human mind was given to it.
DAN 7:5 “Then a second beast appeared, like a bear. It was raised up on one side, and there were three ribs in its mouth between its teeth. It was told, ‘Get up and devour much flesh!’
DAN 7:6 “After these things, as I was watching, another beast like a leopard appeared, with four bird-like wings on its back. This beast had four heads, and ruling authority was given to it.
DAN 7:7 “After these things, as I was watching in the night visions a fourth beast appeared – one dreadful, terrible, and very strong. It had two large rows of iron teeth. It devoured and crushed, and anything that was left it trampled with its feet. It was different from all the beasts that came before it, and it had ten horns.
DAN 7:8 “As I was contemplating the horns, another horn – a small one – came up between them, and three of the former horns were torn out by the roots to make room for it. This horn had eyes resembling human eyes and a mouth speaking arrogant things.
DAN 7:9 “While I was watching, thrones were set up, and the Ancient of Days took his seat. His attire was white like snow; the hair of his head was like lamb’s wool. His throne was ablaze with fire and its wheels were all aflame.
DAN 7:10 A river of fire was streaming forth and proceeding from his presence. Many thousands were ministering to him; Many tens of thousands stood ready to serve him. The court convened and the books were opened.
DAN 7:11 “Then I kept on watching because of the arrogant words of the horn that was speaking. I was watching until the beast was killed and its body destroyed and thrown into the flaming fire.
DAN 7:12 As for the rest of the beasts, their ruling authority had already been removed, though they were permitted to go on living for a time and a season.
DAN 7:13 I was watching in the night visions, “And with the clouds of the sky one like a son of man was approaching. He went up to the Ancient of Days and was escorted before him.
DAN 7:14 To him was given ruling authority, honor, and sovereignty. All peoples, nations, and language groups were serving him. His authority is eternal and will not pass away. His kingdom will not be destroyed.
DAN 7:15 “As for me, Daniel, my spirit was distressed, and the visions of my mind were alarming me.
DAN 7:16 I approached one of those standing nearby and asked him about the meaning of all this. So he spoke with me and revealed to me the interpretation of the vision:
DAN 7:17 ‘These large beasts, which are four in number, represent four kings who will arise from the earth.
DAN 7:18 The holy ones of the Most High will receive the kingdom and will take possession of the kingdom forever and ever.’
DAN 7:19 “Then I wanted to know the meaning of the fourth beast, which was different from all the others. It was very dreadful, with two rows of iron teeth and bronze claws, and it devoured, crushed, and trampled anything that was left with its feet.
DAN 7:20 I also wanted to know the meaning of the ten horns on its head, and of that other horn which came up and before which three others fell. This was the horn that had eyes and a mouth speaking arrogant things, whose appearance was more formidable than the others.
DAN 7:21 While I was watching, that horn began to wage war against the holy ones and was defeating them,
DAN 7:22 until the Ancient of Days arrived and judgment was rendered in favor of the holy ones of the Most High. Then the time came for the holy ones to take possession of the kingdom.
DAN 7:23 “This is what he told me: ‘The fourth beast means that there will be a fourth kingdom on earth that will differ from all the other kingdoms. It will devour all the earth and will trample and crush it.
DAN 7:24 The ten horns mean that ten kings will arise from that kingdom. Another king will arise after them, but he will be different from the earlier ones. He will humiliate three kings.
DAN 7:25 He will speak words against the Most High. He will harass the holy ones of the Most High continually. His intention will be to change times established by law. They will be delivered into his hand For a time, times, and half a time.
DAN 7:26 But the court will convene, and his ruling authority will be removed – destroyed and abolished forever!
DAN 7:27 Then the kingdom, authority, and greatness of the kingdoms under all of heaven will be delivered to the people of the holy ones of the Most High. His kingdom is an eternal kingdom; all authorities will serve him and obey him.’
DAN 7:28 “This is the conclusion of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts troubled me greatly, and the color drained from my face. But I kept the matter to myself.”
DAN 8:1 In the third year of King Belshazzar’s reign, a vision appeared to me, Daniel, after the one that had appeared to me previously.
DAN 8:2 In this vision I saw myself in Susa the citadel, which is located in the province of Elam. In the vision I saw myself at the Ulai Canal.
DAN 8:3 I looked up and saw a ram with two horns standing at the canal. Its two horns were both long, but one was longer than the other. The longer one was coming up after the shorter one.
DAN 8:4 I saw that the ram was butting westward, northward, and southward. No animal was able to stand before it, and there was none who could deliver from its power. It did as it pleased and acted arrogantly.
DAN 8:5 While I was contemplating all this, a male goat was coming from the west over the surface of all the land without touching the ground. This goat had a conspicuous horn between its eyes.
DAN 8:6 It came to the two-horned ram that I had seen standing beside the canal and rushed against it with raging strength.
DAN 8:7 I saw it approaching the ram. It went into a fit of rage against the ram and struck it and broke off its two horns. The ram had no ability to resist it. The goat hurled the ram to the ground and trampled it. No one could deliver the ram from its power.
DAN 8:8 The male goat acted even more arrogantly. But no sooner had the large horn become strong than it was broken, and there arose four conspicuous horns in its place, extending toward the four winds of the sky.
DAN 8:9 From one of them came a small horn. But it grew to be very big, toward the south and the east and toward the beautiful land.
DAN 8:10 It grew so big it reached the army of heaven, and it brought about the fall of some of the army and some of the stars to the ground, where it trampled them.
DAN 8:11 It also acted arrogantly against the Prince of the army, from whom the daily sacrifice was removed and whose sanctuary was thrown down.
DAN 8:12 The army was given over, along with the daily sacrifice, in the course of his sinful rebellion. It hurled truth to the ground and enjoyed success.
DAN 8:13 Then I heard a holy one speaking. Another holy one said to the one who was speaking, “To what period of time does the vision pertain – this vision concerning the daily sacrifice and the destructive act of rebellion and the giving over of both the sanctuary and army to be trampled?”
DAN 8:14 He said to me, “To 2,300 evenings and mornings; then the sanctuary will be put right again.”
DAN 8:15 While I, Daniel, was watching the vision, I sought to understand it. Now one who appeared to be a man was standing before me.
DAN 8:16 Then I heard a human voice coming from between the banks of the Ulai. It called out, “Gabriel, enable this person to understand the vision.”
DAN 8:17 So he approached the place where I was standing. As he came, I felt terrified and fell flat on the ground. Then he said to me, “Understand, son of man, that the vision pertains to the time of the end.”
DAN 8:18 As he spoke with me, I fell into a trance with my face to the ground. But he touched me and stood me upright.
DAN 8:19 Then he said, “I am going to inform you about what will happen in the latter time of wrath, for the vision pertains to the appointed time of the end.
DAN 8:20 The ram that you saw with the two horns stands for the kings of Media and Persia.
DAN 8:21 The male goat is the king of Greece, and the large horn between its eyes is the first king.
DAN 8:22 The horn that was broken and in whose place there arose four others stands for four kingdoms that will arise from his nation, though they will not have his strength.
DAN 8:23 Toward the end of their rule, when rebellious acts are complete, a rash and deceitful king will arise.
DAN 8:24 His power will be great, but it will not be by his strength alone. He will cause terrible destruction. He will be successful in what he undertakes. He will destroy powerful people and the people of the holy ones.
DAN 8:25 By his treachery he will succeed through deceit. He will have an arrogant attitude, and he will destroy many who are unaware of his schemes. He will rise up against the Prince of princes, yet he will be broken apart – but not by human agency.
DAN 8:26 The vision of the evenings and mornings that was told to you is correct. But you should seal up the vision, for it refers to a time many days from now.”
DAN 8:27 I, Daniel, was exhausted and sick for days. Then I got up and again carried out the king’s business. But I was astonished at the vision, and there was no one to explain it.
DAN 9:1 In the first year of Darius son of Ahasuerus, who was of Median descent and who had been appointed king over the Babylonian empire –
DAN 9:2 in the first year of his reign I, Daniel, came to understand from the sacred books that, according to the word of the LORD disclosed to the prophet Jeremiah, the years for the fulfilling of the desolation of Jerusalem were seventy in number.
DAN 9:3 So I turned my attention to the Lord God to implore him by prayer and requests, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes.
DAN 9:4 I prayed to the LORD my God, confessing in this way: “O Lord, great and awesome God who is faithful to his covenant with those who love him and keep his commandments,
DAN 9:5 we have sinned! We have done what is wrong and wicked; we have rebelled by turning away from your commandments and standards.
DAN 9:6 We have not paid attention to your servants the prophets, who spoke by your authority to our kings, our leaders, and our ancestors, and to all the inhabitants of the land as well.
DAN 9:7 “You are righteous, O Lord, but we are humiliated this day – the people of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem and all Israel, both near and far away in all the countries in which you have scattered them, because they have behaved unfaithfully toward you.
DAN 9:8 O LORD, we have been humiliated – our kings, our leaders, and our ancestors – because we have sinned against you.
DAN 9:9 Yet the Lord our God is compassionate and forgiving, even though we have rebelled against him.
DAN 9:10 We have not obeyed the LORD our God by living according to his laws that he set before us through his servants the prophets.
DAN 9:11 “All Israel has broken your law and turned away by not obeying you. Therefore you have poured out on us the judgment solemnly threatened in the law of Moses the servant of God, for we have sinned against you.
DAN 9:12 He has carried out his threats against us and our rulers who were over us by bringing great calamity on us – what has happened to Jerusalem has never been equaled under all heaven!
DAN 9:13 Just as it is written in the law of Moses, so all this calamity has come on us. Still we have not tried to pacify the LORD our God by turning back from our sin and by seeking wisdom from your reliable moral standards.
DAN 9:14 The LORD was mindful of the calamity, and he brought it on us. For the LORD our God is just in all he has done, and we have not obeyed him.
DAN 9:15 “Now, O Lord our God, who brought your people out of the land of Egypt with great power and made a name for yourself that is remembered to this day – we have sinned and behaved wickedly.
DAN 9:16 O Lord, according to all your justice, please turn your raging anger away from your city Jerusalem, your holy mountain. For due to our sins and the iniquities of our ancestors, Jerusalem and your people are mocked by all our neighbors.
DAN 9:17 “So now, our God, accept the prayer and requests of your servant, and show favor to your devastated sanctuary for your own sake.
DAN 9:18 Listen attentively, my God, and hear! Open your eyes and look on our desolated ruins and the city called by your name. For it is not because of our own righteous deeds that we are praying to you, but because your compassion is abundant.
DAN 9:19 O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive! O Lord, pay attention, and act! Don’t delay, for your own sake, O my God! For your city and your people are called by your name.”
DAN 9:20 While I was still speaking and praying, confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel and presenting my request before the LORD my God concerning his holy mountain –
DAN 9:21 yes, while I was still praying, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen previously in a vision, was approaching me in my state of extreme weariness, around the time of the evening offering.
DAN 9:22 He spoke with me, instructing me as follows: “Daniel, I have now come to impart understanding to you.
DAN 9:23 At the beginning of your requests a message went out, and I have come to convey it to you, for you are of great value in God’s sight. Therefore consider the message and understand the vision:
DAN 9:24 “Seventy weeks have been determined concerning your people and your holy city to put an end to rebellion, to bring sin to completion, to atone for iniquity, to bring in perpetual righteousness, to seal up the prophetic vision, and to anoint a most holy place.
DAN 9:25 So know and understand: From the issuing of the command to restore and rebuild Jerusalem until an anointed one, a prince arrives, there will be a period of seven weeks and sixty-two weeks. It will again be built, with plaza and moat, but in distressful times.
DAN 9:26 Now after the sixty-two weeks, an anointed one will be cut off and have nothing. As for the city and the sanctuary, the people of the coming prince will destroy them. But his end will come speedily like a flood. Until the end of the war that has been decreed there will be destruction.
DAN 9:27 He will confirm a covenant with many for one week. But in the middle of that week he will bring sacrifices and offerings to a halt. On the wing of abominations will come one who destroys, until the decreed end is poured out on the one who destroys.”
DAN 10:1 In the third year of King Cyrus of Persia a message was revealed to Daniel (who was also called Belteshazzar). This message was true and concerned a great war. He understood the message and gained insight by the vision.
DAN 10:2 In those days I, Daniel, was mourning for three whole weeks.
DAN 10:3 I ate no choice food; no meat or wine came to my lips, nor did I anoint myself with oil until the end of those three weeks.
DAN 10:4 On the twenty-fourth day of the first month I was beside the great river, the Tigris.
DAN 10:5 I looked up and saw a man clothed in linen; around his waist was a belt made of gold from Upaz.
DAN 10:6 His body resembled yellow jasper, and his face had an appearance like lightning. His eyes were like blazing torches; his arms and feet had the gleam of polished bronze. His voice thundered forth like the sound of a large crowd.
DAN 10:7 Only I, Daniel, saw the vision; the men who were with me did not see it. On the contrary, they were overcome with fright and ran away to hide.
DAN 10:8 I alone was left to see this great vision. My strength drained from me, and my vigor disappeared; I was without energy.
DAN 10:9 I listened to his voice, and as I did so I fell into a trance-like sleep with my face to the ground.
DAN 10:10 Then a hand touched me and set me on my hands and knees.
DAN 10:11 He said to me, “Daniel, you are of great value. Understand the words that I am about to speak to you. So stand up, for I have now been sent to you.” When he said this to me, I stood up shaking.
DAN 10:12 Then he said to me, “Don’t be afraid, Daniel, for from the very first day you applied your mind to understand and to humble yourself before your God, your words were heard. I have come in response to your words.
DAN 10:13 However, the prince of the kingdom of Persia was opposing me for twenty-one days. But Michael, one of the leading princes, came to help me, because I was left there with the kings of Persia.
DAN 10:14 Now I have come to help you understand what will happen to your people in the latter days, for the vision pertains to future days.”
DAN 10:15 While he was saying this to me, I was flat on the ground and unable to speak.
DAN 10:16 Then one who appeared to be a human being was touching my lips. I opened my mouth and started to speak, saying to the one who was standing before me, “Sir, due to the vision, anxiety has gripped me and I have no strength.
DAN 10:17 How, sir, am I able to speak with you? My strength is gone, and I am breathless.”
DAN 10:18 Then the one who appeared to be a human being touched me again and strengthened me.
DAN 10:19 He said to me, “Don’t be afraid, you who are valued. Peace be to you! Be strong! Be really strong!” When he spoke to me, I was strengthened. I said, “Sir, you may speak now, for you have given me strength.”
DAN 10:20 He said, “Do you know why I have come to you? Now I am about to return to engage in battle with the prince of Persia. When I go, the prince of Greece is coming.
DAN 10:21 However, I will first tell you what is written in a dependable book. (There is no one who strengthens me against these princes, except Michael your prince.
DAN 11:1 And in the first year of Darius the Mede, I stood to strengthen him and to provide protection for him.)
DAN 11:2 Now I will tell you the truth. “Three more kings will arise for Persia. Then a fourth king will be unusually rich, more so than all who preceded him. When he has amassed power through his riches, he will stir up everyone against the kingdom of Greece.
DAN 11:3 Then a powerful king will arise, exercising great authority and doing as he pleases.
DAN 11:4 Shortly after his rise to power, his kingdom will be broken up and distributed toward the four winds of the sky – but not to his posterity or with the authority he exercised, for his kingdom will be uprooted and distributed to others besides these.
DAN 11:5 “Then the king of the south and one of his subordinates will grow strong. His subordinate will resist him and will rule a kingdom greater than his.
DAN 11:6 After some years have passed, they will form an alliance. Then the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north to make an agreement, but she will not retain her power, nor will he continue in his strength. She, together with the one who brought her, her child, and her benefactor will all be delivered over at that time.
DAN 11:7 “There will arise in his place one from her family line who will come against their army and will enter the stronghold of the king of the north and will move against them successfully.
DAN 11:8 He will also take their gods into captivity to Egypt, along with their cast images and prized utensils of silver and gold. Then he will withdraw for some years from the king of the north.
DAN 11:9 Then the king of the north will advance against the empire of the king of the south, but will withdraw to his own land.
DAN 11:10 His sons will wage war, mustering a large army which will advance like an overflowing river and carrying the battle all the way to the enemy’s fortress.
DAN 11:11 “Then the king of the south will be enraged and will march out to fight against the king of the north, who will also muster a large army, but that army will be delivered into his hand.
DAN 11:12 When the army is taken away, the king of the south will become arrogant. He will be responsible for the death of thousands and thousands of people, but he will not continue to prevail.
DAN 11:13 For the king of the north will again muster an army, one larger than before. At the end of some years he will advance with a huge army and enormous supplies.
DAN 11:14 “In those times many will oppose the king of the south. Those who are violent among your own people will rise up in confirmation of the vision, but they will falter.
DAN 11:15 Then the king of the north will advance and will build siege mounds and capture a well-fortified city. The forces of the south will not prevail, not even his finest contingents. They will have no strength to prevail.
DAN 11:16 The one advancing against him will do as he pleases, and no one will be able to stand before him. He will prevail in the beautiful land, and its annihilation will be within his power.
DAN 11:17 His intention will be to come with the strength of his entire kingdom, and he will form alliances. He will give the king of the south a daughter in marriage in order to destroy the kingdom, but it will not turn out to his advantage.
DAN 11:18 Then he will turn his attention to the coastal regions and will capture many of them. But a commander will bring his shameful conduct to a halt; in addition, he will make him pay for his shameful conduct.
DAN 11:19 He will then turn his attention to the fortresses of his own land, but he will stumble and fall, not to be found again.
DAN 11:20 There will arise after him one who will send out an exactor of tribute to enhance the splendor of the kingdom, but after a few days he will be destroyed, though not in anger or battle.
DAN 11:21 “Then there will arise in his place a despicable person to whom the royal honor has not been rightfully conferred. He will come on the scene in a time of prosperity and will seize the kingdom through deceit.
DAN 11:22 Armies will be suddenly swept away in defeat before him; both they and a covenant leader will be destroyed.
DAN 11:23 After entering into an alliance with him, he will behave treacherously; he will ascend to power with only a small force.
DAN 11:24 In a time of prosperity for the most productive areas of the province he will come and accomplish what neither his fathers nor their fathers accomplished. He will distribute loot, spoils, and property to his followers, and he will devise plans against fortified cities, but not for long.
DAN 11:25 He will rouse his strength and enthusiasm against the king of the south with a large army. The king of the south will wage war with a large and very powerful army, but he will not be able to prevail because of the plans devised against him.
DAN 11:26 Those who share the king’s fine food will attempt to destroy him, and his army will be swept away; many will be killed in battle.
DAN 11:27 These two kings, their minds filled with evil intentions, will trade lies with one another at the same table. But it will not succeed, for there is still an end at the appointed time.
DAN 11:28 Then the king of the north will return to his own land with much property. His mind will be set against the holy covenant. He will take action, and then return to his own land.
DAN 11:29 At an appointed time he will again invade the south, but this latter visit will not turn out the way the former one did.
DAN 11:30 The ships of Kittim will come against him, leaving him disheartened. He will turn back and direct his indignation against the holy covenant. He will return and honor those who forsake the holy covenant.
DAN 11:31 His forces will rise up and profane the fortified sanctuary, stopping the daily sacrifice. In its place they will set up the abomination that causes desolation.
DAN 11:32 Then with smooth words he will defile those who have rejected the covenant. But the people who are loyal to their God will act valiantly.
DAN 11:33 These who are wise among the people will teach the masses. However, they will fall by the sword and by the flame, and they will be imprisoned and plundered for some time.
DAN 11:34 When they stumble, they will be granted some help. But many will unite with them deceitfully.
DAN 11:35 Even some of the wise will stumble, resulting in their refinement, purification, and cleansing until the time of the end, for it is still for the appointed time.
DAN 11:36 “Then the king will do as he pleases. He will exalt and magnify himself above every deity and he will utter presumptuous things against the God of gods. He will succeed until the time of wrath is completed, for what has been decreed must occur.
DAN 11:37 He will not respect the gods of his fathers – not even the god loved by women. He will not respect any god; he will elevate himself above them all.
DAN 11:38 What he will honor is a god of fortresses – a god his fathers did not acknowledge he will honor with gold, silver, valuable stones, and treasured commodities.
DAN 11:39 He will attack mighty fortresses, aided by a foreign deity. To those who recognize him he will grant considerable honor. He will place them in authority over many people, and he will parcel out land for a price.
DAN 11:40 “At the time of the end the king of the south will attack him. Then the king of the north will storm against him with chariots, horsemen, and a large armada of ships. He will invade lands, passing through them like an overflowing river.
DAN 11:41 Then he will enter the beautiful land. Many will fall, but these will escape: Edom, Moab, and the Ammonite leadership.
DAN 11:42 He will extend his power against other lands; the land of Egypt will not escape.
DAN 11:43 He will have control over the hidden stores of gold and silver, as well as all the treasures of Egypt. Libyans and Ethiopians will submit to him.
DAN 11:44 But reports will trouble him from the east and north, and he will set out in a tremendous rage to destroy and wipe out many.
DAN 11:45 He will pitch his royal tents between the seas toward the beautiful holy mountain. But he will come to his end, with no one to help him.
DAN 12:1 “At that time Michael, the great prince who watches over your people, will arise. There will be a time of distress unlike any other from the nation’s beginning up to that time. But at that time your own people, all those whose names are found written in the book, will escape.
DAN 12:2 Many of those who sleep in the dusty ground will awake – some to everlasting life, and others to shame and everlasting abhorrence.
DAN 12:3 But the wise will shine like the brightness of the heavenly expanse. And those bringing many to righteousness will be like the stars forever and ever.
DAN 12:4 “But you, Daniel, close up these words and seal the book until the time of the end. Many will dash about, and knowledge will increase.”
DAN 12:5 I, Daniel, watched as two others stood there, one on each side of the river.
DAN 12:6 One said to the man clothed in linen who was above the waters of the river, “When will the end of these wondrous events occur?”
DAN 12:7 Then I heard the man clothed in linen who was over the waters of the river as he raised both his right and left hands to the sky and made an oath by the one who lives forever: “It is for a time, times, and half a time. Then, when the power of the one who shatters the holy people has been exhausted, all these things will be finished.”
DAN 12:8 I heard, but I did not understand. So I said, “Sir, what will happen after these things?”
DAN 12:9 He said, “Go, Daniel. For these matters are closed and sealed until the time of the end.
DAN 12:10 Many will be purified, made clean, and refined, but the wicked will go on being wicked. None of the wicked will understand, though the wise will understand.
DAN 12:11 From the time that the daily sacrifice is removed and the abomination that causes desolation is set in place, there are 1,290 days.
DAN 12:12 Blessed is the one who waits and attains to the 1,335 days.
DAN 12:13 But you should go your way until the end. You will rest and then at the end of the days you will arise to receive what you have been allotted.”
HOS 1:1 This is the word of the Lord which was revealed to Hosea son of Beeri during the time when Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah ruled Judah, and during the time when Jeroboam son of Joash ruled Israel.
HOS 1:2 When the Lord first spoke through Hosea, he said to him, “Go marry a prostitute who will bear illegitimate children conceived through prostitution, because the nation continually commits spiritual prostitution by turning away from the Lord.”
HOS 1:3 So Hosea married Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim. Then she conceived and gave birth to a son for him.
HOS 1:4 Then the Lord said to Hosea, “Name him ‘Jezreel,’ because in a little while I will punish the dynasty of Jehu on account of the bloodshed in the valley of Jezreel, and I will put an end to the kingdom of Israel.
HOS 1:5 At that time, I will destroy the military power of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.”
HOS 1:6 She conceived again and gave birth to a daughter. Then the Lord said to him, “Name her ‘No Pity’ (Lo-Ruhamah) because I will no longer have pity on the nation of Israel. For I will certainly not forgive their guilt.
HOS 1:7 But I will have pity on the nation of Judah. I will deliver them by the Lord their God; I will not deliver them by the warrior’s bow, by sword, by military victory, by chariot horses, or by chariots.”
HOS 1:8 When she had weaned ‘No Pity’ (Lo-Ruhamah) she conceived again and gave birth to another son.
HOS 1:9 Then the Lord said: “Name him ‘Not My People’ (Lo-Ammi), because you are not my people and I am not your God.”
HOS 1:10 However, in the future the number of the people of Israel will be like the sand of the sea which can be neither measured nor numbered. Although it was said to them, “You are not my people,” it will be said to them, “You are children of the living God!”
HOS 1:11 Then the people of Judah and the people of Israel will be gathered together. They will appoint for themselves one leader, and will flourish in the land. Certainly, the day of Jezreel will be great!
HOS 2:1 Then you will call your brother, “My People” (Ammi)! You will call your sister, “Pity” (Ruhamah)!
HOS 2:2 Plead earnestly with your mother (for she is not my wife, and I am not her husband), so that she might put an end to her adulterous lifestyle, and turn away from her sexually immoral behavior.
HOS 2:3 Otherwise, I will strip her naked, and expose her like she was when she was born. I will turn her land into a wilderness and make her country a parched land, so that I might kill her with thirst.
HOS 2:4 I will have no pity on her children, because they are children conceived in adultery.
HOS 2:5 For their mother has committed adultery; she who conceived them has acted shamefully. For she said, “I will seek out my lovers; they are the ones who give me my bread and my water, my wool, my flax, my olive oil, and my wine.
HOS 2:6 Therefore, I will soon fence her in with thorns; I will wall her in so that she cannot find her way.
HOS 2:7 Then she will pursue her lovers, but she will not catch them; she will seek them, but she will not find them. Then she will say, “I will go back to my husband, because I was better off then than I am now.”
HOS 2:8 Yet until now she has refused to acknowledge that I was the one who gave her the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil; and that it was I who lavished on her the silver and gold – which they used in worshiping Baal!
HOS 2:9 Therefore, I will take back my grain during the harvest time and my new wine when it ripens; I will take away my wool and my flax which I had provided in order to clothe her.
HOS 2:10 Soon I will expose her lewd nakedness in front of her lovers, and no one will be able to rescue her from me!
HOS 2:11 I will put an end to all her celebration: her annual religious festivals, monthly new moon celebrations, and weekly Sabbath festivities – all her appointed festivals.
HOS 2:12 I will destroy her vines and fig trees, about which she said, “These are my wages for prostitution that my lovers gave to me!” I will turn her cultivated vines and fig trees into an uncultivated thicket, so that wild animals will devour them.
HOS 2:13 “I will punish her for the festival days when she burned incense to the Baal idols; she adorned herself with earrings and jewelry, and went after her lovers, but she forgot me!” says the Lord.
HOS 2:14 However, in the future I will allure her; I will lead her back into the wilderness, and speak tenderly to her.
HOS 2:15 From there I will give back her vineyards to her, and turn the “Valley of Trouble” into an “Opportunity for Hope.” There she will sing as she did when she was young, when she came up from the land of Egypt.
HOS 2:16 “At that time,” declares the Lord, “you will call, ‘My husband’; you will never again call me, ‘My master.’
HOS 2:17 For I will remove the names of the Baal idols from your lips, so that you will never again utter their names!”
HOS 2:18 “At that time I will make a covenant for them with the wild animals, the birds of the air, and the creatures that crawl on the ground. I will abolish the warrior’s bow and sword – that is, every weapon of warfare – from the land, and I will allow them to live securely.”
HOS 2:19 I will commit myself to you forever; I will commit myself to you in righteousness and justice, in steadfast love and tender compassion.
HOS 2:20 I will commit myself to you in faithfulness; then you will acknowledge the Lord.”
HOS 2:21 “At that time, I will willingly respond,” declares the Lord. “I will respond to the sky, and the sky will respond to the ground;
HOS 2:22 then the ground will respond to the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil; and they will respond to ‘God Plants’ (Jezreel)!
HOS 2:23 Then I will plant her as my own in the land. I will have pity on ‘No Pity’ (Lo-Ruhamah). I will say to ‘Not My People’ (Lo-Ammi), ‘You are my people!’ And he will say, ‘You are my God!’”
HOS 3:1 The Lord said to me, “Go, show love to your wife again, even though she loves another man and continually commits adultery. Likewise, the Lord loves the Israelites although they turn to other gods and love to offer raisin cakes to idols.”
HOS 3:2 So I paid fifteen shekels of silver and about seven bushels of barley to purchase her.
HOS 3:3 Then I told her, “You must live with me many days; you must not commit adultery or have sexual intercourse with another man, and I also will wait for you.”
HOS 3:4 For the Israelites must live many days without a king or prince, without sacrifice or sacred fertility pillar, without ephod or idols.
HOS 3:5 Afterward, the Israelites will turn and seek the Lord their God and their Davidic king. Then they will submit to the Lord in fear and receive his blessings in the future.
HOS 4:1 Hear the word of the Lord, you Israelites! For the Lord has a covenant lawsuit against the people of Israel. For there is neither faithfulness nor loyalty in the land, nor do they acknowledge God.
HOS 4:2 There is only cursing, lying, murder, stealing, and adultery. They resort to violence and bloodshed.
HOS 4:3 Therefore the land will mourn, and all its inhabitants will perish. The wild animals, the birds of the sky, and even the fish in the sea will perish.
HOS 4:4 Do not let anyone accuse or contend against anyone else: for my case is against you priests!
HOS 4:5 You stumble day and night, and the false prophets stumble with you; You have destroyed your own people!
HOS 4:6 You have destroyed my people by failing to acknowledge me! Because you refuse to acknowledge me, I will reject you as my priests. Because you reject the law of your God, I will reject your descendants.
HOS 4:7 The more the priests increased in numbers, the more they rebelled against me. They have turned their glorious calling into a shameful disgrace!
HOS 4:8 They feed on the sin offerings of my people; their appetites long for their iniquity!
HOS 4:9 I will deal with the people and priests together: I will punish them both for their ways, and I will repay them for their deeds.
HOS 4:10 They will eat, but not be satisfied; they will engage in prostitution, but not increase in numbers; because they have abandoned the Lord by pursuing other gods.
HOS 4:11 Old and new wine take away the understanding of my people.
HOS 4:12 They consult their wooden idols, and their diviner’s staff answers with an oracle. The wind of prostitution blows them astray; they commit spiritual adultery against their God.
HOS 4:13 They sacrifice on the mountaintops, and burn offerings on the hills; they sacrifice under oak, poplar, and terebinth, because their shade is so pleasant. As a result, your daughters have become cult prostitutes, and your daughters-in-law commit adultery!
HOS 4:14 I will not punish your daughters when they commit prostitution, nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery. For the men consort with harlots, they sacrifice with temple prostitutes. It is true: “A people that lacks understanding will come to ruin!”
HOS 4:15 Although you, O Israel, commit adultery, do not let Judah become guilty! Do not journey to Gilgal! Do not go up to Beth Aven! Do not swear, “As surely as the Lord lives!”
HOS 4:16 Israel has rebelled like a stubborn heifer! Soon the Lord will put them out to pasture like a lamb in a broad field!
HOS 4:17 Ephraim has attached himself to idols; Do not go near him!
HOS 4:18 They consume their alcohol, then engage in cult prostitution; they dearly love their shameful behavior.
HOS 4:19 A whirlwind has wrapped them in its wings; they will be brought to shame because of their idolatrous worship.
HOS 5:1 Hear this, you priests! Pay attention, you Israelites! Listen closely, O king! For judgment is about to overtake you! For you were like a trap to Mizpah, like a net spread out to catch Tabor.
HOS 5:2 Those who revolt are knee-deep in slaughter, but I will discipline them all.
HOS 5:3 I know Ephraim all too well; the evil of Israel is not hidden from me. For you have engaged in prostitution, O Ephraim; Israel has defiled itself.
HOS 5:4 Their wicked deeds do not allow them to return to their God; because a spirit of idolatry controls their heart, and they do not acknowledge the Lord.
HOS 5:5 The arrogance of Israel testifies against it; Israel and Ephraim will be overthrown because of their iniquity. Even Judah will be brought down with them.
HOS 5:6 Although they bring their flocks and herds to seek the favor of the Lord, They will not find him – he has withdrawn himself from them!
HOS 5:7 They have committed treason against the Lord, because they bore illegitimate children. Soon the new moon festival will devour them and their fields.
HOS 5:8 Blow the ram’s horn in Gibeah! Sound the trumpet in Ramah! Sound the alarm in Beth Aven! Tremble in fear, O Benjamin!
HOS 5:9 Ephraim will be ruined in the day of judgment! What I am declaring to the tribes of Israel will certainly take place!
HOS 5:10 The princes of Judah are like those who move boundary markers. I will pour out my rage on them like a torrential flood!
HOS 5:11 Ephraim will be oppressed, crushed under judgment, because he was determined to pursue worthless idols.
HOS 5:12 I will be like a moth to Ephraim, like wood rot to the house of Judah.
HOS 5:13 When Ephraim saw his sickness and Judah saw his wound, then Ephraim turned to Assyria, and begged its great king for help. But he will not be able to heal you! He cannot cure your wound!
HOS 5:14 I will be like a lion to Ephraim, like a young lion to the house of Judah. I myself will tear them to pieces, then I will carry them off, and no one will be able to rescue them!
HOS 5:15 Then I will return again to my lair until they have suffered their punishment. Then they will seek me; in their distress they will earnestly seek me.
HOS 6:1 “Come on! Let’s return to the Lord! He himself has torn us to pieces, but he will heal us! He has injured us, but he will bandage our wounds!
HOS 6:2 He will restore us in a very short time; he will heal us in a little while, so that we may live in his presence.
HOS 6:3 So let us acknowledge him! Let us seek to acknowledge the Lord! He will come to our rescue as certainly as the appearance of the dawn, as certainly as the winter rain comes, as certainly as the spring rain that waters the land.”
HOS 6:4 What am I going to do with you, O Ephraim? What am I going to do with you, O Judah? For your faithfulness is as fleeting as the morning mist; it disappears as quickly as dawn’s dew!
HOS 6:5 Therefore, I will certainly cut you into pieces at the hands of the prophets; I will certainly kill you in fulfillment of my oracles of judgment; for my judgment will come forth like the light of the dawn.
HOS 6:6 For I delight in faithfulness, not simply in sacrifice; I delight in acknowledging God, not simply in whole burnt offerings.
HOS 6:7 At Adam they broke the covenant; Oh how they were unfaithful to me!
HOS 6:8 Gilead is a city full of evildoers; its streets are stained with bloody footprints!
HOS 6:9 The company of priests is like a gang of robbers, lying in ambush to pounce on a victim. They commit murder on the road to Shechem; they have done heinous crimes!
HOS 6:10 I have seen a disgusting thing in the temple of Israel: there Ephraim practices temple prostitution and Judah defiles itself.
HOS 6:11 I have appointed a time to reap judgment for you also, O Judah! Whenever I want to restore the fortunes of my people,
HOS 7:1 whenever I want to heal Israel, the sin of Ephraim is revealed, and the evil deeds of Samaria are exposed. For they do what is wrong; thieves break into houses, and gangs rob people out in the streets.
HOS 7:2 They do not realize that I remember all of their wicked deeds. Their evil deeds have now surrounded them; their sinful deeds are always before me.
HOS 7:3 The royal advisers delight the king with their evil schemes, the princes make him glad with their lies.
HOS 7:4 They are all like bakers, they are like a smoldering oven; they are like a baker who does not stoke the fire until the kneaded dough is ready for baking.
HOS 7:5 At the celebration of their king, his princes become inflamed with wine; they conspire with evildoers.
HOS 7:6 They approach him, all the while plotting against him. Their hearts are like an oven; their anger smolders all night long, but in the morning it bursts into a flaming fire.
HOS 7:7 All of them are blazing like an oven; they devour their rulers. All of their kings fall – and none of them call on me!
HOS 7:8 Ephraim has mixed itself like flour among the nations; Ephraim is like a ruined cake of bread that is scorched on one side.
HOS 7:9 Foreigners are consuming what his strenuous labor produced, but he does not recognize it! His head is filled with gray hair, but he does not realize it!
HOS 7:10 The arrogance of Israel testifies against him, yet they refuse to return to the Lord their God! In spite of all this they refuse to seek him!
HOS 7:11 Ephraim has been like a dove, easily deceived and lacking discernment. They called to Egypt for help; they turned to Assyria for protection.
HOS 7:12 I will throw my bird net over them while they are flying, I will bring them down like birds in the sky; I will discipline them when I hear them flocking together.
HOS 7:13 Woe to them! For they have fled from me! Destruction to them! For they have rebelled against me! I want to deliver them, but they have lied to me.
HOS 7:14 They do not pray to me, but howl in distress on their beds; They slash themselves for grain and new wine, but turn away from me.
HOS 7:15 Although I trained and strengthened them, they plot evil against me!
HOS 7:16 They turn to Baal; they are like an unreliable bow. Their leaders will fall by the sword because their prayers to Baal have made me angry. So people will disdain them in the land of Egypt.
HOS 8:1 Sound the alarm! An eagle looms over the temple of the Lord! For they have broken their covenant with me, and have rebelled against my law.
HOS 8:2 Israel cries out to me, “My God, we acknowledge you!”
HOS 8:3 But Israel has rejected what is morally good; so an enemy will pursue him.
HOS 8:4 They enthroned kings without my consent! They appointed princes without my approval! They made idols out of their silver and gold, but they will be destroyed!
HOS 8:5 O Samaria, he has rejected your calf idol! My anger burns against them! They will not survive much longer without being punished, even though they are Israelites!
HOS 8:6 That idol was made by a workman – it is not God! The calf idol of Samaria will be broken to bits.
HOS 8:7 They sow the wind, and so they will reap the whirlwind! The stalk does not have any standing grain; it will not produce any flour. Even if it were to yield grain, foreigners would swallow it all up.
HOS 8:8 Israel will be swallowed up among the nations; they will be like a worthless piece of pottery.
HOS 8:9 They have gone up to Assyria, like a wild donkey that wanders off. Ephraim has hired prostitutes as lovers.
HOS 8:10 Even though they have hired lovers among the nations, I will soon gather them together for judgment. Then they will begin to waste away under the oppression of a mighty king.
HOS 8:11 Although Ephraim has built many altars for sin offerings, these have become altars for sinning!
HOS 8:12 I spelled out my law for him in great detail, but they regard it as something totally unknown to them!
HOS 8:13 They offer up sacrificial gifts to me, and eat the meat, but the Lord does not accept their sacrifices. Soon he will remember their wrongdoing, he will punish their sins, and they will return to Egypt.
HOS 8:14 Israel has forgotten his Maker and built royal palaces, and Judah has built many fortified cities. But I will send fire on their cities; it will consume their royal citadels.
HOS 9:1 O Israel, do not rejoice jubilantly like the nations, for you are unfaithful to your God. You love to receive a prostitute's wages on all the floors where you thresh your grain.
HOS 9:2 Threshing floors and wine vats will not feed the people, and new wine only deceives them.
HOS 9:3 They will not remain in the Lord’s land. Ephraim will return to Egypt; they will eat ritually unclean food in Assyria.
HOS 9:4 They will not pour out drink offerings of wine to the Lord; they will not please him with their sacrifices. Their sacrifices will be like bread eaten while in mourning; all those who eat them will make themselves ritually unclean. For their bread will be only to satisfy their appetite; it will not come into the temple of the Lord.
HOS 9:5 So what will you do on the festival day, on the festival days of the Lord?
HOS 9:6 Look! Even if they flee from the destruction, Egypt will take hold of them, and Memphis will bury them. The weeds will inherit the silver they treasure – thorn bushes will occupy their homes.
HOS 9:7 The time of judgment is about to arrive! The time of retribution is imminent! Let Israel know! The prophet is considered a fool – the inspired man is viewed as a madman – because of the multitude of your sins and your intense animosity.
HOS 9:8 The prophet is a watchman over Ephraim on behalf of God, yet traps are laid for him along all of his paths; animosity rages against him in the land of his God.
HOS 9:9 They have sunk deep into corruption as in the days of Gibeah. He will remember their wrongdoing. He will repay them for their sins.
HOS 9:10 When I found Israel, it was like finding grapes in the wilderness. I viewed your ancestors like an early fig on a fig tree in its first season. Then they came to Baal-Peor and they dedicated themselves to shame – they became as detestable as what they loved.
HOS 9:11 Ephraim will be like a bird; what they value will fly away. They will not bear children – they will not enjoy pregnancy – they will not even conceive!
HOS 9:12 Even if they raise their children, I will take away every last one of them. Woe to them! For I will turn away from them.
HOS 9:13 Just as lion cubs are born predators, so Ephraim will bear his sons for slaughter.
HOS 9:14 Give them, O Lord – what will you give them? Give them wombs that miscarry, and breasts that cannot nurse!
HOS 9:15 Because of all their evil in Gilgal, I hate them there. On account of their evil deeds, I will drive them out of my land. I will no longer love them; all their rulers are rebels.
HOS 9:16 Ephraim will be struck down – their root will be dried up; they will not yield any fruit. Even if they do bear children, I will kill their precious offspring.
HOS 9:17 My God will reject them, for they have not obeyed him; so they will be fugitives among the nations.
HOS 10:1 Israel was a fertile vine that yielded fruit. As his fruit multiplied, he multiplied altars to Baal. As his land prospered, they adorned the fertility pillars.
HOS 10:2 Their heart is slipping; soon they will be punished for their guilt. The Lord will break their altars; he will completely destroy their fertility pillars.
HOS 10:3 Very soon they will say, “We have no king since we did not fear the Lord. But what can a king do for us anyway?”
HOS 10:4 They utter empty words, taking false oaths and making empty agreements. Therefore legal disputes sprout up like poisonous weeds in the furrows of a plowed field.
HOS 10:5 The inhabitants of Samaria will lament over the calf idol of Beth Aven. Its people will mourn over it; its idolatrous priests will wail over it, because its splendor will be taken from them into exile.
HOS 10:6 Even the calf idol will be carried to Assyria, as tribute for the great king. Ephraim will be disgraced; Israel will be put to shame because of its wooden idol.
HOS 10:7 Samaria and its king will be carried off like a twig on the surface of the waters.
HOS 10:8 The high places of the “House of Wickedness” will be destroyed; it is the place where Israel sins. Thorns and thistles will grow up over its altars. Then they will say to the mountains, “Cover us!” and to the hills, “Fall on us!”
HOS 10:9 O Israel, you have sinned since the time of Gibeah, and there you have remained. Did not war overtake the evildoers in Gibeah?
HOS 10:10 When I please, I will discipline them; I will gather nations together to attack them, to bind them in chains for their two sins.
HOS 10:11 Ephraim was a well-trained heifer who loved to thresh grain; I myself put a fine yoke on her neck. I will harness Ephraim. Let Judah plow! Let Jacob break up the unplowed ground for himself!
HOS 10:12 Sow righteousness for yourselves, reap unfailing love. Break up the unplowed ground for yourselves, for it is time to seek the Lord, until he comes and showers deliverance on you.
HOS 10:13 But you have plowed wickedness; you have reaped injustice; you have eaten the fruit of deception. Because you have depended on your chariots; you have relied on your many warriors.
HOS 10:14 The roar of battle will rise against your people; all your fortresses will be devastated, just as Shalman devastated Beth Arbel on the day of battle, when mothers were dashed to the ground with their children.
HOS 10:15 So will it happen to you, O Bethel, because of your great wickedness! When that day dawns, the king of Israel will be destroyed.
HOS 11:1 When Israel was a young man, I loved him like a son, and I summoned my son out of Egypt.
HOS 11:2 But the more I summoned them, the farther they departed from me. They sacrificed to the Baal idols and burned incense to images.
HOS 11:3 Yet it was I who led Ephraim, I took them by the arm; but they did not acknowledge that I had healed them.
HOS 11:4 I led them with leather cords, with leather ropes; I lifted the yoke from their neck, and gently fed them.
HOS 11:5 They will return to Egypt! Assyria will rule over them because they refuse to repent!
HOS 11:6 A sword will flash in their cities, it will destroy the bars of their city gates, and will devour them in their fortresses.
HOS 11:7 My people are obsessed with turning away from me; they call to Baal, but he will never exalt them!
HOS 11:8 How can I give you up, O Ephraim? How can I surrender you, O Israel? How can I treat you like Admah? How can I make you like Zeboiim? I have had a change of heart! All my tender compassions are aroused!
HOS 11:9 I cannot carry out my fierce anger! I cannot totally destroy Ephraim! Because I am God, and not man – the Holy One among you – I will not come in wrath!
HOS 11:10 He will roar like a lion, and they will follow the Lord; when he roars, his children will come trembling from the west.
HOS 11:11 They will return in fear and trembling like birds from Egypt, like doves from Assyria, and I will settle them in their homes,” declares the Lord.
HOS 11:12 Ephraim has surrounded me with lies; the house of Israel has surrounded me with deceit. But Judah still roams about with God; he remains faithful to the Holy One.
HOS 12:1 Ephraim continually feeds on the wind; he chases the east wind all day; he multiplies lies and violence. They make treaties with Assyria, and send olive oil as tribute to Egypt.
HOS 12:2 The Lord also has a covenant lawsuit against Judah; he will punish Jacob according to his ways and repay him according to his deeds.
HOS 12:3 In the womb he attacked his brother; in his manly vigor he struggled with God.
HOS 12:4 He struggled with an angel and prevailed; he wept and begged for his favor. He found God at Bethel, and there he spoke with him!
HOS 12:5 As for the Lord God Almighty, the Lord is the name by which he is remembered!
HOS 12:6 But you must return to your God, by maintaining love and justice, and by waiting for your God to return to you.
HOS 12:7 The businessmen love to cheat; they use dishonest scales.
HOS 12:8 Ephraim boasts, “I am very rich! I have become wealthy! In all that I have done to gain my wealth, no one can accuse me of any offense that is actually sinful.”
HOS 12:9 “I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt; I will make you live in tents again as in the days of old.
HOS 12:10 I spoke to the prophets; I myself revealed many visions; I spoke in parables through the prophets.”
HOS 12:11 Is there idolatry in Gilead? Certainly its inhabitants will come to nothing! Do they sacrifice bulls in Gilgal? Surely their altars will be like stones heaped up on a plowed field!
HOS 12:12 Jacob fled to the country of Aram, then Israel worked to acquire a wife; he tended sheep to pay for her.
HOS 12:13 The Lord brought Israel out of Egypt by a prophet, and due to a prophet Israel was preserved alive.
HOS 12:14 But Ephraim bitterly provoked him to anger; so he will hold him accountable for the blood he has shed, his Lord will repay him for the contempt he has shown.
HOS 13:1 When Ephraim spoke, there was terror; he was exalted in Israel, but he became guilty by worshiping Baal and died.
HOS 13:2 Even now they persist in sin! They make metal images for themselves, idols that they skillfully fashion from their own silver; all of them are nothing but the work of craftsmen! There is a saying about them: “Those who sacrifice to the calf idol are calf kissers!”
HOS 13:3 Therefore they will disappear like the morning mist, like early morning dew that evaporates, like chaff that is blown away from a threshing floor, like smoke that disappears through an open window.
HOS 13:4 But I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt. Therefore, you must not acknowledge any God but me; except me there is no Savior.
HOS 13:5 I cared for you in the wilderness, in the dry desert where no water was.
HOS 13:6 When they were fed, they became satisfied; when they were satisfied, they became proud; as a result, they forgot me!
HOS 13:7 So I will pounce on them like a lion; like a leopard I will lurk by the path.
HOS 13:8 I will attack them like a bear robbed of her cubs – I will rip open their chests. I will devour them there like a lion – like a wild animal would tear them apart.
HOS 13:9 I will destroy you, O Israel! Who is there to help you?
HOS 13:10 Where then is your king, that he may save you in all your cities? Where are your rulers for whom you asked, saying, “Give me a king and princes”?
HOS 13:11 I granted you a king in my anger, and I will take him away in my wrath!
HOS 13:12 The punishment of Ephraim has been decreed; his punishment is being stored up for the future.
HOS 13:13 The labor pains of a woman will overtake him, but the baby will lack wisdom; when the time arrives, he will not come out of the womb!
HOS 13:14 Will I deliver them from the power of Sheol? No, I will not! Will I redeem them from death? No, I will not! O Death, bring on your plagues! O Sheol, bring on your destruction! My eyes will not show any compassion!
HOS 13:15 Even though he flourishes like a reed plant, a scorching east wind will come, a wind from the Lord rising up from the desert. As a result, his spring will dry up; his well will become dry. That wind will spoil all his delightful foods in the containers in his storehouse.
HOS 13:16 Samaria will be held guilty, because she rebelled against her God. They will fall by the sword, their infants will be dashed to the ground – their pregnant women will be ripped open.
HOS 14:1 Return, O Israel, to the Lord your God, for your sin has been your downfall!
HOS 14:2 Return to the Lord and repent! Say to him: “Completely forgive our iniquity; accept our penitential prayer, that we may offer the praise of our lips as sacrificial bulls.
HOS 14:3 Assyria cannot save us; we will not ride warhorses. We will never again say, ‘Our gods’ to what our own hands have made. For only you will show compassion to Orphan Israel!”
HOS 14:4 “I will heal their waywardness and love them freely, for my anger will turn away from them.
HOS 14:5 I will be like the dew to Israel; he will blossom like a lily, he will send down his roots like a cedar of Lebanon.
HOS 14:6 His young shoots will grow; his splendor will be like an olive tree, his fragrance like a cedar of Lebanon.
HOS 14:7 People will reside again in his shade; they will plant and harvest grain in abundance. They will blossom like a vine, and his fame will be like the wine from Lebanon.
HOS 14:8 O Ephraim, I do not want to have anything to do with idols anymore! I will answer him and care for him. I am like a luxuriant cypress tree; your fruitfulness comes from me!
HOS 14:9 Who is wise? Let him discern these things! Who is discerning? Let him understand them! For the ways of the Lord are right; the godly walk in them, but in them the rebellious stumble.
JOE 1:1 This is the Lord’s message that was given to Joel the son of Pethuel:
JOE 1:2 Listen to this, you elders; pay attention, all inhabitants of the land. Has anything like this ever happened in your whole life or in the lifetime of your ancestors?
JOE 1:3 Tell your children about it, have your children tell their children, and their children the following generation.
JOE 1:4 What the gazam-locust left the ‘arbeh-locust consumed, what the ‘arbeh-locust left the yeleq-locust consumed, and what the yeleq-locust left the hasil-locust consumed!
JOE 1:5 Wake up, you drunkards, and weep! Wail, all you wine drinkers, because the sweet wine has been taken away from you.
JOE 1:6 For a nation has invaded our land. There are so many of them they are too numerous to count. Their teeth are like those of a lion; they tear apart their prey like a lioness.
JOE 1:7 They have destroyed our vines; they have turned our fig trees into mere splinters. They have completely stripped off the bark and thrown them aside; the twigs are stripped bare.
JOE 1:8 Wail like a young virgin clothed in sackcloth, lamenting the death of her husband-to-be.
JOE 1:9 No one brings grain offerings or drink offerings to the temple of the Lord anymore. So the priests, those who serve the Lord, are in mourning.
JOE 1:10 The crops of the fields have been destroyed. The ground is in mourning because the grain has perished. The fresh wine has dried up; the olive oil languishes.
JOE 1:11 Be distressed, farmers; wail, vinedressers, over the wheat and the barley. For the harvest of the field has perished.
JOE 1:12 The vine has dried up; the fig tree languishes – the pomegranate, date, and apple as well. In fact, all the trees of the field have dried up. Indeed, the joy of the people has dried up!
JOE 1:13 Get dressed and lament, you priests! Wail, you who minister at the altar! Come, spend the night in sackcloth, you servants of my God, because no one brings grain offerings or drink offerings to the temple of your God anymore.
JOE 1:14 Announce a holy fast; proclaim a sacred assembly. Gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land to the temple of the Lord your God, and cry out to the Lord.
JOE 1:15 How awful that day will be! For the day of the Lord is near; it will come as destruction from the Divine Destroyer.
JOE 1:16 Our food has been cut off right before our eyes! There is no longer any joy or gladness in the temple of our God!
JOE 1:17 The grains of seed have shriveled beneath their shovels. Storehouses have been decimated and granaries have been torn down, for the grain has dried up.
JOE 1:18 Listen to the cattle groan! The herds of livestock wander around in confusion because they have no pasture. Even the flocks of sheep are suffering.
JOE 1:19 To you, O Lord, I call out for help, for fire has burned up the grassy pastures, flames have razed all the trees in the fields.
JOE 1:20 Even the wild animals cry out to you; for the river beds have dried up; fire has destroyed the grassy pastures.
JOE 2:1 Blow the trumpet in Zion; sound the alarm signal on my holy mountain! Let all the inhabitants of the land shake with fear, for the day of the Lord is about to come. Indeed, it is near!
JOE 2:2 It will be a day of dreadful darkness, a day of foreboding storm clouds, like blackness spread over the mountains. It is a huge and powerful army – there has never been anything like it ever before, and there will not be anything like it for many generations to come!
JOE 2:3 Like fire they devour everything in their path; a flame blazes behind them. The land looks like the Garden of Eden before them, but behind them there is only a desolate wilderness – for nothing escapes them!
JOE 2:4 They look like horses; they charge ahead like war horses.
JOE 2:5 They sound like chariots rumbling over mountain tops, like the crackling of blazing fire consuming stubble, like the noise of a mighty army being drawn up for battle.
JOE 2:6 People writhe in fear when they see them. All of their faces turn pale with fright.
JOE 2:7 They charge like warriors; they scale walls like soldiers. Each one proceeds on his course; they do not alter their path.
JOE 2:8 They do not jostle one another; each of them marches straight ahead. They burst through the city defenses and do not break ranks.
JOE 2:9 They rush into the city; they scale its walls. They climb up into the houses; they go in through the windows like a thief.
JOE 2:10 The earth quakes before them; the sky reverberates. The sun and the moon grow dark; the stars refuse to shine.
JOE 2:11 The voice of the Lord thunders as he leads his army. Indeed, his warriors are innumerable; Surely his command is carried out! Yes, the day of the Lord is awesome and very terrifying – who can survive it?
JOE 2:12 “Yet even now,” the Lord says, “return to me with all your heart – with fasting, weeping, and mourning. Tear your hearts, not just your garments!”
JOE 2:13 Return to the Lord your God, for he is merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and boundless in loyal love – often relenting from calamitous punishment.
JOE 2:14 Who knows? Perhaps he will be compassionate and grant a reprieve, and leave blessing in his wake – a meal offering and a drink offering for you to offer to the Lord your God!
JOE 2:15 Blow the trumpet in Zion. Announce a holy fast; proclaim a sacred assembly!
JOE 2:16 Gather the people; sanctify an assembly! Gather the elders; gather the children and the nursing infants. Let the bridegroom come out from his bedroom and the bride from her private quarters.
JOE 2:17 Let the priests, those who serve the Lord, weep from the vestibule all the way back to the altar. Let them say, “Have pity, O Lord, on your people; please do not turn over your inheritance to be mocked, to become a proverb among the nations. Why should it be said among the peoples, “Where is their God?”
JOE 2:18 Then the Lord became zealous for his land; he had compassion on his people.
JOE 2:19 The Lord responded to his people, “Look! I am about to restore your grain as well as fresh wine and olive oil. You will be fully satisfied. I will never again make you an object of mockery among the nations.
JOE 2:20 I will remove the one from the north far from you. I will drive him out to a dry and desolate place. Those in front will be driven eastward into the Dead Sea, and those in back westward into the Mediterranean Sea. His stench will rise up as a foul smell.” Indeed, the Lord has accomplished great things.
JOE 2:21 Do not fear, my land! Rejoice and be glad, because the Lord has accomplished great things!
JOE 2:22 Do not fear, wild animals! For the pastures of the wilderness are again green with grass. Indeed, the trees bear their fruit; the fig tree and the vine yield to their fullest.
JOE 2:23 Citizens of Zion, rejoice! Be glad because of what the Lord your God has done! For he has given to you the early rains as vindication. He has sent to you the rains – both the early and the late rains as formerly.
JOE 2:24 The threshing floors are full of grain; the vats overflow with fresh wine and olive oil.
JOE 2:25 I will make up for the years that the ‘arbeh-locust consumed your crops – the yeleq-locust, the hasil-locust, and the gazam-locust – my great army that I sent against you.
JOE 2:26 You will have plenty to eat, and your hunger will be fully satisfied; you will praise the name of the Lord your God, who has acted wondrously in your behalf. My people will never again be put to shame.
JOE 2:27 You will be convinced that I am in the midst of Israel. I am the Lord your God; there is no other. My people will never again be put to shame.
JOE 2:28 After all of this I will pour out my Spirit on all kinds of people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy. Your elderly will have revelatory dreams; your young men will see prophetic visions.
JOE 2:29 Even on male and female servants I will pour out my Spirit in those days.
JOE 2:30 I will produce portents both in the sky and on the earth – blood, fire, and columns of smoke.
JOE 2:31 The sunlight will be turned to darkness and the moon to the color of blood, before the day of the Lord comes – that great and terrible day!
JOE 2:32 It will so happen that everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be delivered. For on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be those who survive, just as the Lord has promised; the remnant will be those whom the Lord will call.
JOE 3:1 For look! In those days and at that time I will return the exiles to Judah and Jerusalem.
JOE 3:2 Then I will gather all the nations, and bring them down to the valley of Jehoshaphat. I will enter into judgment against them there concerning my people Israel who are my inheritance, whom they scattered among the nations. They partitioned my land,
JOE 3:3 and they cast lots for my people. They traded a boy for a prostitute; they sold a little girl for wine so they could drink.
JOE 3:4 Why are you doing these things to me, Tyre and Sidon? Are you trying to get even with me, land of Philistia? I will very quickly repay you for what you have done!
JOE 3:5 For you took my silver and my gold and brought my precious valuables to your own palaces.
JOE 3:6 You sold Judeans and Jerusalemites to the Greeks, removing them far from their own country.
JOE 3:7 Look! I am rousing them from that place to which you sold them. I will repay you for what you have done!
JOE 3:8 I will sell your sons and daughters to the people of Judah. They will sell them to the Sabeans, a nation far away. Indeed, the Lord has spoken!
JOE 3:9 Proclaim this among the nations: “Prepare for a holy war! Call out the warriors! Let all these fighting men approach and attack!
JOE 3:10 Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruning hooks into spears! Let the weak say, ‘I too am a warrior!’
JOE 3:11 Lend your aid and come, all you surrounding nations, and gather yourselves to that place.” Bring down, O Lord, your warriors!
JOE 3:12 Let the nations be roused and let them go up to the valley of Jehoshaphat, for there I will sit in judgment on all the surrounding nations.
JOE 3:13 Rush forth with the sickle, for the harvest is ripe! Come, stomp the grapes, for the winepress is full! The vats overflow. Indeed, their evil is great!
JOE 3:14 Crowds, great crowds are in the valley of decision, for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision!
JOE 3:15 The sun and moon are darkened; the stars withhold their brightness.
JOE 3:16 The Lord roars from Zion; from Jerusalem his voice bellows out. The heavens and the earth shake. But the Lord is a refuge for his people; he is a stronghold for the citizens of Israel.
JOE 3:17 You will be convinced that I the Lord am your God, dwelling on Zion, my holy mountain. Jerusalem will be holy – conquering armies will no longer pass through it.
JOE 3:18 On that day the mountains will drip with sweet wine, and the hills will flow with milk. All the dry stream beds of Judah will flow with water. A spring will flow out from the temple of the Lord, watering the Valley of Acacia Trees.
JOE 3:19 Egypt will be desolate and Edom will be a desolate wilderness, because of the violence they did to the people of Judah, in whose land they shed innocent blood.
JOE 3:20 But Judah will reside securely forever, and Jerusalem will be secure from one generation to the next.
JOE 3:21 I will avenge their blood which I had not previously acquitted. It is the Lord who dwells in Zion!
AMO 1:1 The following is a record of what Amos prophesied. He was one of the herdsmen from Tekoa. These prophecies about Israel were revealed to him during the time of King Uzziah of Judah and King Jeroboam son of Joash of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
AMO 1:2 Amos said: “The Lord comes roaring out of Zion; from Jerusalem he comes bellowing! The shepherds’ pastures wilt; the summit of Carmel withers.”
AMO 1:3 This is what the Lord says: “Because Damascus has committed three crimes – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They ripped through Gilead like threshing sledges with iron teeth.
AMO 1:4 So I will set Hazael’s house on fire; fire will consume Ben Hadad’s fortresses.
AMO 1:5 I will break the bar on the gate of Damascus. I will remove the ruler from Wicked Valley, the one who holds the royal scepter from Beth Eden. The people of Aram will be deported to Kir.” The Lord has spoken!
AMO 1:6 This is what the Lord says: “Because Gaza has committed three crimes – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They deported a whole community and sold them to Edom.
AMO 1:7 So I will set Gaza’s city wall on fire; fire will consume her fortresses.
AMO 1:8 I will remove the ruler from Ashdod, the one who holds the royal scepter from Ashkelon. I will strike Ekron with my hand; the rest of the Philistines will also die.” The sovereign Lord has spoken!
AMO 1:9 This is what the Lord says: “Because Tyre has committed three crimes – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They sold a whole community to Edom; they failed to observe a treaty of brotherhood.
AMO 1:10 So I will set fire to Tyre’s city wall; fire will consume her fortresses.”
AMO 1:11 This is what the Lord says: “Because Edom has committed three crimes – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. He chased his brother with a sword; he wiped out his allies. In his anger he tore them apart without stopping to rest; in his fury he relentlessly attacked them.
AMO 1:12 So I will set Teman on fire; fire will consume Bozrah’s fortresses.”
AMO 1:13 This is what the Lord says: “Because the Ammonites have committed three crimes – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They ripped open Gilead’s pregnant women so they could expand their territory.
AMO 1:14 So I will set fire to Rabbah’s city wall; fire will consume her fortresses. War cries will be heard on the day of battle; a strong gale will blow on the day of the windstorm.
AMO 1:15 Ammon’s king will be deported; he and his officials will be carried off together.” The Lord has spoken!
AMO 2:1 This is what the Lord says: “Because Moab has committed three crimes – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They burned the bones of Edom’s king into lime.
AMO 2:2 So I will set Moab on fire, and it will consume Kerioth’s fortresses. Moab will perish in the heat of battle amid war cries and the blaring of the ram’s horn.
AMO 2:3 I will remove Moab’s leader; I will kill all Moab’s officials with him.” The Lord has spoken!
AMO 2:4 This is what the Lord says: “Because Judah has committed three covenant transgressions – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They rejected the Lord’s law; they did not obey his commands. Their false gods, to which their fathers were loyal, led them astray.
AMO 2:5 So I will set Judah on fire, and it will consume Jerusalem’s fortresses.”
AMO 2:6 This is what the Lord says: “Because Israel has committed three covenant transgressions – make that four! – I will not revoke my decree of judgment. They sold the innocent for silver, the needy for a pair of sandals.
AMO 2:7 They trample on the dirt-covered heads of the poor; they push the destitute away. A man and his father go to the same girl; in this way they show disrespect for my moral purity.
AMO 2:8 They stretch out on clothing seized as collateral; they do so right beside every altar! They drink wine bought with the fines they have levied; they do so right in the temple of their God!
AMO 2:9 For Israel’s sake I destroyed the Amorites. They were as tall as cedars and as strong as oaks, but I destroyed the fruit on their branches and their roots in the ground.
AMO 2:10 I brought you up from the land of Egypt; I led you through the wilderness for forty years so you could take the Amorites’ land as your own.
AMO 2:11 I made some of your sons prophets and some of your young men Nazirites. Is this not true, you Israelites?” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 2:12 “But you made the Nazirites drink wine; you commanded the prophets, ‘Do not prophesy!’
AMO 2:13 Look! I will press you down, like a cart loaded down with grain presses down.
AMO 2:14 Fast runners will find no place to hide; strong men will have no strength left; warriors will not be able to save their lives.
AMO 2:15 Archers will not hold their ground; fast runners will not save their lives, nor will those who ride horses.
AMO 2:16 Bravehearted warriors will run away naked in that day.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 3:1 Listen, you Israelites, to this message which the Lord is proclaiming against you! This message is for the entire clan I brought up from the land of Egypt:
AMO 3:2 “I have chosen you alone from all the clans of the earth. Therefore I will punish you for all your sins.”
AMO 3:3 Do two walk together without having met?
AMO 3:4 Does a lion roar in the woods if he has not cornered his prey? Does a young lion bellow from his den if he has not caught something?
AMO 3:5 Does a bird swoop down into a trap on the ground if there is no bait? Does a trap spring up from the ground unless it has surely caught something?
AMO 3:6 If an alarm sounds in a city, do people not fear? If disaster overtakes a city, is the Lord not responsible?
AMO 3:7 Certainly the sovereign Lord does nothing without first revealing his plan to his servants the prophets.
AMO 3:8 A lion has roared! Who is not afraid? The sovereign Lord has spoken! Who can refuse to prophesy?
AMO 3:9 Make this announcement in the fortresses of Ashdod and in the fortresses in the land of Egypt. Say this: “Gather on the hills around Samaria! Observe the many acts of violence taking place within the city, the oppressive deeds occurring in it.”
AMO 3:10 “They do not know how to do what is right.” (The Lord is speaking.) “They store up the spoils of destructive violence in their fortresses.
AMO 3:11 Therefore,” says the sovereign Lord, “an enemy will encircle the land. He will take away your power; your fortresses will be looted.”
AMO 3:12 This is what the Lord says: “Just as a shepherd salvages from the lion’s mouth a couple of leg bones or a piece of an ear, so the Israelites who live in Samaria will be salvaged. They will be left with just a corner of a bed, and a part of a couch.”
AMO 3:13 Listen and warn the family of Jacob! The sovereign Lord, the God who commands armies, is speaking!
AMO 3:14 “Certainly when I punish Israel for their covenant transgressions, I will destroy Bethel’s altars. The horns of the altar will be cut off and fall to the ground.
AMO 3:15 I will destroy both the winter and summer houses. The houses filled with ivory will be ruined, the great houses will be swept away.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:1 Listen to this message, you cows of Bashan who live on Mount Samaria! You oppress the poor; you crush the needy. You say to your husbands, “Bring us more to drink!”
AMO 4:2 The sovereign Lord confirms this oath by his own holy character: “Certainly the time is approaching when you will be carried away in baskets, every last one of you in fishermen’s pots.
AMO 4:3 Each of you will go straight through the gaps in the walls; you will be thrown out toward Harmon.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:4 “Go to Bethel and rebel! At Gilgal rebel some more! Bring your sacrifices in the morning, your tithes on the third day!
AMO 4:5 Burn a thank offering of bread made with yeast! Make a public display of your voluntary offerings! For you love to do this, you Israelites.” The sovereign Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:6 “But surely I gave you no food to eat in any of your cities; you lacked food everywhere you live. Still you did not come back to me.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:7 “I withheld rain from you three months before the harvest. I gave rain to one city, but not to another. One field would get rain, but the field that received no rain dried up.
AMO 4:8 People from two or three cities staggered into one city to get water, but remained thirsty. Still you did not come back to me.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:9 “I destroyed your crops with blight and disease. Locusts kept devouring your orchards, vineyards, fig trees, and olive trees. Still you did not come back to me.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:10 “I sent against you a plague like one of the Egyptian plagues. I killed your young men with the sword, along with the horses you had captured. I made the stench from the corpses rise up into your nostrils. Still you did not come back to me.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:11 “I overthrew some of you the way God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. You were like a burning stick snatched from the flames. Still you did not come back to me.” The Lord is speaking!
AMO 4:12 “Therefore this is what I will do to you, Israel. Because I will do this to you, prepare to meet your God, Israel!
AMO 4:13 For here he is! He formed the mountains and created the wind. He reveals his plans to men. He turns the dawn into darkness and marches on the heights of the earth. The Lord, the God who commands armies, is his name!”
AMO 5:1 Listen to this funeral song I am ready to sing about you, family of Israel:
AMO 5:2 “The virgin Israel has fallen down and will not get up again. She is abandoned on her own land with no one to help her get up.”
AMO 5:3 The sovereign Lord says this: “The city that marches out with a thousand soldiers will have only a hundred left; the town that marches out with a hundred soldiers will have only ten left for the family of Israel.”
AMO 5:4 The Lord says this to the family of Israel: “Seek me so you can live!
AMO 5:5 Do not seek Bethel! Do not visit Gilgal! Do not journey down to Beer Sheba! For the people of Gilgal will certainly be carried into exile; and Bethel will become a place where disaster abounds.”
AMO 5:6 Seek the Lord so you can live! Otherwise he will break out like fire against Joseph’s family; the fire will consume and no one will be able to quench it and save Bethel.
AMO 5:7 The Israelites turn justice into bitterness; they throw what is fair and right to the ground.
AMO 5:8 (But there is one who made the constellations Pleiades and Orion; he can turn the darkness into morning and daylight into night. He summons the water of the seas and pours it out on the earth’s surface. The Lord is his name!
AMO 5:9 He flashes destruction down upon the strong so that destruction overwhelms the fortified places.)
AMO 5:10 The Israelites hate anyone who arbitrates at the city gate; they despise anyone who speaks honestly.
AMO 5:11 Therefore, because you make the poor pay taxes on their crops and exact a grain tax from them, you will not live in the houses you built with chiseled stone, nor will you drink the wine from the fine vineyards you planted.
AMO 5:12 Certainly I am aware of your many rebellious acts and your numerous sins. You torment the innocent, you take bribes, and you deny justice to the needy at the city gate.
AMO 5:13 For this reason whoever is smart keeps quiet in such a time, for it is an evil time.
AMO 5:14 Seek good and not evil so you can live! Then the Lord, the God who commands armies, just might be with you, as you claim he is.
AMO 5:15 Hate what is wrong, love what is right! Promote justice at the city gate! Maybe the Lord, the God who commands armies, will have mercy on those who are left from Joseph.
AMO 5:16 Because of Israel’s sins this is what the Lord, the God who commands armies, the sovereign One, says: “In all the squares there will be wailing, in all the streets they will mourn the dead. They will tell the field workers to lament and the professional mourners to wail.
AMO 5:17 In all the vineyards there will be wailing, for I will pass through your midst,” says the Lord.
AMO 5:18 Woe to those who wish for the day of the Lord Why do you want the Lord’s day of judgment to come? It will bring darkness, not light.
AMO 5:19 Disaster will be inescapable, as if a man ran from a lion only to meet a bear, then escaped into a house, leaned his hand against the wall, and was bitten by a poisonous snake.
AMO 5:20 Don’t you realize the Lord’s day of judgment will bring darkness, not light – gloomy blackness, not bright light?
AMO 5:21 “I absolutely despise your festivals! I get no pleasure from your religious assemblies!
AMO 5:22 Even if you offer me burnt and grain offerings, I will not be satisfied; I will not look with favor on your peace offerings of fattened calves.
AMO 5:23 Take away from me your noisy songs; I don’t want to hear the music of your stringed instruments.
AMO 5:24 Justice must flow like torrents of water, righteous actions like a stream that never dries up.
AMO 5:25 You did not bring me sacrifices and grain offerings during the forty years you spent in the wilderness, family of Israel.
AMO 5:26 You will pick up your images of Sikkuth, your king, and Kiyyun, your star god, which you made for yourselves,
AMO 5:27 and I will drive you into exile beyond Damascus,” says the Lord. He is called the God who commands armies!
AMO 6:1 Woe to those who live in ease in Zion, to those who feel secure on Mount Samaria. They think of themselves as the elite class of the best nation. The family of Israel looks to them for leadership.
AMO 6:2 They say to the people: “Journey over to Calneh and look at it! Then go from there to Hamath-Rabbah! Then go down to Gath of the Philistines! Are they superior to our two kingdoms? Is their territory larger than yours?”
AMO 6:3 You refuse to believe a day of disaster will come, but you establish a reign of violence.
AMO 6:4 They lie around on beds decorated with ivory, and sprawl out on their couches. They eat lambs from the flock, and calves from the middle of the pen.
AMO 6:5 They sing to the tune of stringed instruments; like David they invent musical instruments.
AMO 6:6 They drink wine from sacrificial bowls, and pour the very best oils on themselves. Yet they are not concerned over the ruin of Joseph.
AMO 6:7 Therefore they will now be the first to go into exile, and the religious banquets where they sprawl on couches will end.
AMO 6:8 The sovereign Lord confirms this oath by his very own life. The Lord, the God who commands armies, is speaking: “I despise Jacob’s arrogance; I hate their fortresses. I will hand over to their enemies the city of Samaria and everything in it.”
AMO 6:9 If ten men are left in one house, they too will die.
AMO 6:10 When their close relatives, the ones who will burn the corpses, pick up their bodies to remove the bones from the house, they will say to anyone who is in the inner rooms of the house, “Is anyone else with you?” He will respond, “Be quiet! Don’t invoke the Lord’s name!”
AMO 6:11 Indeed, look! The Lord is giving the command. He will smash the large house to bits, and the small house into little pieces.
AMO 6:12 Can horses run on rocky cliffs? Can one plow the sea with oxen? Yet you have turned justice into a poisonous plant, and the fruit of righteous actions into a bitter plant.
AMO 6:13 You are happy because you conquered Lo-Debar. You say, “Did we not conquer Karnaim by our own power?”
AMO 6:14 “Look! I am about to bring a nation against you, family of Israel.” The Lord, the God who commands armies, is speaking. “They will oppress you all the way from Lebo-Hamath to the Stream of the Arabah.”
AMO 7:1 The sovereign Lord showed me this: I saw him making locusts just as the crops planted late were beginning to sprout. (The crops planted late sprout after the royal harvest. )
AMO 7:2 When they had completely consumed the earth’s vegetation, I said, “Sovereign Lord, forgive Israel! How can Jacob survive? He is too weak!”
AMO 7:3 The Lord decided not to do this. “It will not happen,” the Lord said.
AMO 7:4 The sovereign Lord showed me this: I saw the sovereign Lord summoning a shower of fire. It consumed the great deep and devoured the fields.
AMO 7:5 I said, “Sovereign Lord, stop! How can Jacob survive? He is too weak!”
AMO 7:6 The Lord decided not to do this. The sovereign Lord said, “This will not happen either.”
AMO 7:7 He showed me this: I saw the sovereign One standing by a tin wall holding tin in his hand.
AMO 7:8 The Lord said to me, “What do you see, Amos?” I said, “Tin.” The sovereign One then said, “Look, I am about to place tin among my people Israel. I will no longer overlook their sin.
AMO 7:9 Isaac’s centers of worship will become desolate; Israel’s holy places will be in ruins. I will attack Jeroboam’s dynasty with the sword.”
AMO 7:10 Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent this message to King Jeroboam of Israel: “Amos is conspiring against you in the very heart of the kingdom of Israel! The land cannot endure all his prophecies.
AMO 7:11 As a matter of fact, Amos is saying this: ‘Jeroboam will die by the sword and Israel will certainly be carried into exile away from its land.’”
AMO 7:12 Amaziah then said to Amos, “Leave, you visionary! Run away to the land of Judah! Earn your living and prophesy there!
AMO 7:13 Don’t prophesy at Bethel any longer, for a royal temple and palace are here!”
AMO 7:14 Amos replied to Amaziah, “I was not a prophet by profession. No, I was a herdsman who also took care of sycamore fig trees.
AMO 7:15 Then the Lord took me from tending flocks and gave me this commission, ‘Go! Prophesy to my people Israel!’
AMO 7:16 So now listen to the Lord’s message! You say, ‘Don’t prophesy against Israel! Don’t preach against the family of Isaac!’
AMO 7:17 “Therefore this is what the Lord says: ‘Your wife will become a prostitute in the streets and your sons and daughters will die violently. Your land will be given to others and you will die in a foreign land. Israel will certainly be carried into exile away from its land.’”
AMO 8:1 The sovereign Lord showed me this: I saw a basket of summer fruit.
AMO 8:2 He said, “What do you see, Amos?” I replied, “A basket of summer fruit.” Then the Lord said to me, “The end has come for my people Israel! I will no longer overlook their sins.
AMO 8:3 The women singing in the temple will wail in that day.” The sovereign Lord is speaking. “There will be many corpses littered everywhere! Be quiet!”
AMO 8:4 Listen to this, you who trample the needy, and do away with the destitute in the land.
AMO 8:5 You say, “When will the new moon festival be over, so we can sell grain? When will the Sabbath end, so we can open up the grain bins? We’re eager to sell less for a higher price, and to cheat the buyer with rigged scales!
AMO 8:6 We’re eager to trade silver for the poor, a pair of sandals for the needy! We want to mix in some chaff with the grain!”
AMO 8:7 The Lord confirms this oath by the arrogance of Jacob: “I swear I will never forget all you have done!
AMO 8:8 Because of this the earth will quake, and all who live in it will mourn. The whole earth will rise like the River Nile, it will surge upward and then grow calm, like the Nile in Egypt.
AMO 8:9 In that day,” says the sovereign Lord, “I will make the sun set at noon, and make the earth dark in the middle of the day.
AMO 8:10 I will turn your festivals into funerals, and all your songs into funeral dirges. I will make everyone wear funeral clothes and cause every head to be shaved bald. I will make you mourn as if you had lost your only son; when it ends it will indeed have been a bitter day.
AMO 8:11 Be certain of this, the time is coming,” says the sovereign Lord, “when I will send a famine through the land – not a shortage of food or water but an end to divine revelation!
AMO 8:12 People will stagger from sea to sea, and from the north around to the east. They will wander about looking for a revelation from the Lord, but they will not find any.
AMO 8:13 In that day your beautiful young women and your young men will faint from thirst.
AMO 8:14 These are the ones who now take oaths in the name of the sinful idol goddess of Samaria. They vow, ‘As surely as your god lives, O Dan,’ or ‘As surely as your beloved one lives, O Beer Sheba!’ But they will fall down and not get up again.”
AMO 9:1 I saw the sovereign One standing by the altar and he said, “Strike the tops of the support pillars, so the thresholds shake! Knock them down on the heads of all the people, and I will kill the survivors with the sword. No one will be able to run away; no one will be able to escape.
AMO 9:2 Even if they could dig down into the netherworld, my hand would pull them up from there. Even if they could climb up to heaven, I would drag them down from there.
AMO 9:3 Even if they were to hide on the top of Mount Carmel, I would hunt them down and take them from there. Even if they tried to hide from me at the bottom of the sea, from there I would command the Sea Serpent to bite them.
AMO 9:4 Even when their enemies drive them into captivity, from there I will command the sword to kill them. I will not let them out of my sight; they will experience disaster, not prosperity.”
AMO 9:5 The sovereign Lord who commands armies will do this. He touches the earth and it dissolves; all who live on it mourn. The whole earth rises like the River Nile, and then grows calm like the Nile in Egypt.
AMO 9:6 He builds the upper rooms of his palace in heaven and sets its foundation supports on the earth. He summons the water of the sea and pours it out on the earth’s surface. The Lord is his name.
AMO 9:7 “You Israelites are just like the Ethiopians in my sight,” says the Lord. “Certainly I brought Israel up from the land of Egypt, but I also brought the Philistines from Caphtor and the Arameans from Kir.
AMO 9:8 Look, the sovereign Lord is watching the sinful nation, and I will destroy it from the face of the earth. But I will not completely destroy the family of Jacob,” says the Lord.
AMO 9:9 “For look, I am giving a command and I will shake the family of Israel together with all the nations. It will resemble a sieve being shaken, when not even a pebble falls to the ground.
AMO 9:10 All the sinners among my people will die by the sword – the ones who say, ‘Disaster will not come near, it will not confront us.’
AMO 9:11 “In that day I will rebuild the collapsing hut of David. I will seal its gaps, repair its ruins, and restore it to what it was like in days gone by.
AMO 9:12 As a result they will conquer those left in Edom and all the nations subject to my rule.” The Lord, who is about to do this, is speaking!
AMO 9:13 “Be sure of this, the time is coming,” says the Lord, “when the plowman will catch up to the reaper and the one who stomps the grapes will overtake the planter. Juice will run down the slopes, it will flow down all the hillsides.
AMO 9:14 I will bring back my people, Israel; they will rebuild the cities lying in rubble and settle down. They will plant vineyards and drink the wine they produce; they will grow orchards and eat the fruit they produce.
AMO 9:15 I will plant them on their land and they will never again be uprooted from the land I have given them,” says the Lord your God.
OBA 1:1 The vision that Obadiah saw. The Lord God says this concerning Edom: We have heard a report from the Lord. An envoy was sent among the nations, saying, “Arise! Let us make war against Edom!”
OBA 1:2 The Lord says, “Look! I will make you a weak nation; you will be greatly despised!
OBA 1:3 Your presumptuous heart has deceived you – you who reside in the safety of the rocky cliffs, whose home is high in the mountains. You think to yourself, ‘No one can bring me down to the ground!’
OBA 1:4 Even if you were to soar high like an eagle, even if you were to make your nest among the stars, I can bring you down even from there!” says the Lord.
OBA 1:5 “If thieves came to rob you during the night, they would steal only as much as they wanted! If grape pickers came to harvest your vineyards, they would leave some behind for the poor! But you will be totally destroyed!
OBA 1:6 How the people of Esau will be thoroughly plundered! Their hidden valuables will be ransacked!
OBA 1:7 All your allies will force you from your homeland! Your treaty partners will deceive you and overpower you. Your trusted friends will set an ambush for you that will take you by surprise!
OBA 1:8 At that time,” the Lord says, “I will destroy the wise sages of Edom! the advisers from Esau’s mountain!
OBA 1:9 Your warriors will be shattered, O Teman, so that everyone will be destroyed from Esau’s mountain!
OBA 1:10 “Because you violently slaughtered your relatives, the people of Jacob, shame will cover you, and you will be destroyed forever.
OBA 1:11 You stood aloof while strangers took his army captive, and foreigners advanced to his gates. When they cast lots over Jerusalem, you behaved as though you were in league with them.
OBA 1:12 You should not have gloated when your relatives suffered calamity. You should not have rejoiced over the people of Judah when they were destroyed. You should not have boasted when they suffered adversity.
OBA 1:13 You should not have entered the city of my people when they experienced distress. You should not have joined in gloating over their misfortune when they suffered distress. You should not have looted their wealth when they endured distress.
OBA 1:14 You should not have stood at the fork in the road to slaughter those trying to escape. You should not have captured their refugees when they suffered adversity.
OBA 1:15 “For the day of the Lord is approaching for all the nations! Just as you have done, so it will be done to you. You will get exactly what your deeds deserve.
OBA 1:16 For just as you have drunk on my holy mountain, so all the nations will drink continually. They will drink, and they will gulp down; they will be as though they had never been.
OBA 1:17 But on Mount Zion there will be a remnant of those who escape, and it will be a holy place once again. The descendants of Jacob will conquer those who had conquered them.
OBA 1:18 The descendants of Jacob will be a fire, and the descendants of Joseph a flame. The descendants of Esau will be like stubble. They will burn them up and devour them. There will not be a single survivor of the descendants of Esau!” Indeed, the Lord has spoken it.
OBA 1:19 The people of the Negev will take possession of Esau’s mountain, and the people of the Shephelah will take possession of the land of the Philistines. They will also take possession of the territory of Ephraim and the territory of Samaria, and the people of Benjamin will take possession of Gilead.
OBA 1:20 The exiles of this fortress of the people of Israel will take possession of what belongs to the people of Canaan, as far as Zarephath, and the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad will take possession of the towns of the Negev.
OBA 1:21 Those who have been delivered will go up on Mount Zion in order to rule over Esau’s mountain. Then the Lord will reign as King!
JON 1:1 The Lord said to Jonah son of Amittai,
JON 1:2 “Go immediately to Nineveh, that large capital city, and announce judgment against its people because their wickedness has come to my attention.”
JON 1:3 Instead, Jonah immediately headed off to Tarshish to escape from the commission of the Lord. He traveled to Joppa and found a merchant ship heading to Tarshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard it to go with them to Tarshish far away from the Lord.
JON 1:4 But the Lord hurled a powerful wind on the sea. Such a violent tempest arose on the sea that the ship threatened to break up!
JON 1:5 The sailors were so afraid that each cried out to his own god and they flung the ship’s cargo overboard to make the ship lighter. Jonah, meanwhile, had gone down into the hold below deck, had lain down, and was sound asleep.
JON 1:6 The ship’s captain approached him and said, “What are you doing asleep? Get up! Cry out to your god! Perhaps your god might take notice of us so that we might not die!”
JON 1:7 The sailors said to one another, “Come on, let’s cast lots to find out whose fault it is that this disaster has overtaken us. ” So they cast lots, and Jonah was singled out.
JON 1:8 They said to him, “Tell us, whose fault is it that this disaster has overtaken us? What’s your occupation? Where do you come from? What’s your country? And who are your people?”
JON 1:9 He said to them, “I am a Hebrew! And I worship the Lord, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.”
JON 1:10 Hearing this, the men became even more afraid and said to him, “What have you done?” (The men said this because they knew that he was trying to escape from the Lord, because he had previously told them. )
JON 1:11 Because the storm was growing worse and worse, they said to him, “What should we do to you to make the sea calm down for us?”
JON 1:12 He said to them, “Pick me up and throw me into the sea to make the sea quiet down, because I know it’s my fault you are in this severe storm.”
JON 1:13 Instead, they tried to row back to land, but they were not able to do so because the storm kept growing worse and worse.
JON 1:14 So they cried out to the Lord, “Oh, please, Lord, don’t let us die on account of this man! Don’t hold us guilty of shedding innocent blood. After all, you, Lord, have done just as you pleased.”
JON 1:15 So they picked Jonah up and threw him into the sea, and the sea stopped raging.
JON 1:16 The men feared the Lord greatly, and earnestly vowed to offer lavish sacrifices to the Lord.
JON 1:17 The Lord sent a huge fish to swallow Jonah, and Jonah was in the stomach of the fish three days and three nights.
JON 2:1 Jonah prayed to the Lord his God from the stomach of the fish
JON 2:2 and said, “I called out to the Lord from my distress, and he answered me; from the belly of Sheol I cried out for help, and you heard my prayer.
JON 2:3 You threw me into the deep waters, into the middle of the sea; the ocean current engulfed me; all the mighty waves you sent swept over me.
JON 2:4 I thought I had been banished from your sight, that I would never again see your holy temple!
JON 2:5 Water engulfed me up to my neck; the deep ocean surrounded me; seaweed was wrapped around my head.
JON 2:6 I went down to the very bottoms of the mountains; the gates of the netherworld barred me in forever; but you brought me up from the Pit, O Lord, my God.
JON 2:7 When my life was ebbing away, I called out to the Lord, and my prayer came to your holy temple.
JON 2:8 Those who worship worthless idols forfeit the mercy that could be theirs.
JON 2:9 But as for me, I promise to offer a sacrifice to you with a public declaration of praise; I will surely do what I have promised. Salvation belongs to the Lord!”
JON 2:10 Then the Lord commanded the fish and it disgorged Jonah on dry land.
JON 3:1 The Lord said to Jonah a second time,
JON 3:2 “Go immediately to Nineveh, that large city, and proclaim to it the message that I tell you.”
JON 3:3 So Jonah went immediately to Nineveh, as the Lord had said. (Now Nineveh was an enormous city – it required three days to walk through it!)
JON 3:4 When Jonah began to enter the city one day’s walk, he announced, “At the end of forty days, Nineveh will be overthrown!”
JON 3:5 The people of Nineveh believed in God, and they declared a fast and put on sackcloth, from the greatest to the least of them.
JON 3:6 When the news reached the king of Nineveh, he got up from his throne, took off his royal robe, put on sackcloth, and sat on ashes.
JON 3:7 He issued a proclamation and said, “In Nineveh, by the decree of the king and his nobles: No human or animal, cattle or sheep, is to taste anything; they must not eat and they must not drink water.
JON 3:8 Every person and animal must put on sackcloth and must cry earnestly to God, and everyone must turn from their evil way of living and from the violence that they do.
JON 3:9 Who knows? Perhaps God might be willing to change his mind and relent and turn from his fierce anger so that we might not die.”
JON 3:10 When God saw their actions – they turned from their evil way of living! – God relented concerning the judgment he had threatened them with and he did not destroy them.
JON 4:1 This displeased Jonah terribly and he became very angry.
JON 4:2 He prayed to the Lord and said, “Oh, Lord, this is just what I thought would happen when I was in my own country. This is what I tried to prevent by attempting to escape to Tarshish! – because I knew that you are gracious and compassionate, slow to anger and abounding in mercy, and one who relents concerning threatened judgment.
JON 4:3 So now, Lord, kill me instead, because I would rather die than live!”
JON 4:4 The Lord said, “Are you really so very angry?”
JON 4:5 Jonah left the city and sat down east of it. He made a shelter for himself there and sat down under it in the shade to see what would happen to the city.
JON 4:6 The Lord God appointed a little plant and caused it to grow up over Jonah to be a shade over his head to rescue him from his misery. Now Jonah was very delighted about the little plant.
JON 4:7 So God sent a worm at dawn the next day, and it attacked the little plant so that it dried up.
JON 4:8 When the sun began to shine, God sent a hot east wind. So the sun beat down on Jonah’s head, and he grew faint. So he despaired of life, and said, “I would rather die than live!”
JON 4:9 God said to Jonah, “Are you really so very angry about the little plant?” And he said, “I am as angry as I could possibly be!”
JON 4:10 The Lord said, “You were upset about this little plant, something for which you have not worked nor did you do anything to make it grow. It grew up overnight and died the next day.
JON 4:11 Should I not be even more concerned about Nineveh, this enormous city? There are more than one hundred twenty thousand people in it who do not know right from wrong, as well as many animals!”
MIC 1:1 This is the prophetic message that the Lord gave to Micah of Moresheth. He delivered this message during the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. The prophecies pertain to Samaria
MIC 1:2 Listen, all you nations! Pay attention, all inhabitants of earth! The sovereign Lord will testify against you; the Lord will accuse you from his majestic palace.
MIC 1:3 Look, the Lord is coming out of his dwelling place! He will descend and march on the earth’s mountaintops!
MIC 1:4 The mountains will disintegrate beneath him, and the valleys will be split in two. The mountains will melt like wax in a fire, the rocks will slide down like water cascading down a steep slope.
MIC 1:5 All this is because of Jacob’s rebellion and the sins of the nation of Israel. How has Jacob rebelled, you ask? Samaria epitomizes their rebellion! Where are Judah’s pagan worship centers, you ask? They are right in Jerusalem!
MIC 1:6 “I will turn Samaria into a heap of ruins in an open field – vineyards will be planted there! I will tumble the rubble of her stone walls down into the valley, and tear down her fortifications to their foundations.
MIC 1:7 All her carved idols will be smashed to pieces; all her metal cult statues will be destroyed by fire. I will make a waste heap of all her images. Since she gathered the metal as a prostitute collects her wages, the idols will become a prostitute’s wages again.”
MIC 1:8 For this reason I will mourn and wail; I will walk around barefoot and without my outer garments. I will howl like a wild dog, and screech like an owl.
MIC 1:9 For Samaria’s disease is incurable. It has infected Judah; it has spread to the leadership of my people and has even contaminated Jerusalem!
MIC 1:10 Don’t spread the news in Gath! Don’t shed even a single tear! In Beth Leaphrah sit in the dust!
MIC 1:11 Residents of Shaphir, pass by in nakedness and humiliation! The residents of Zaanan can’t leave their city. Beth Ezel mourns, “He takes from you what he desires.”
MIC 1:12 Indeed, the residents of Maroth hope for something good to happen, though the Lord has sent disaster against the city of Jerusalem.
MIC 1:13 Residents of Lachish, hitch the horses to the chariots! You influenced Daughter Zion to sin, for Israel’s rebellious deeds can be traced back to you!
MIC 1:14 Therefore you will have to say farewell to Moresheth Gath. The residents of Achzib will be as disappointing as a dried up well to the kings of Israel.
MIC 1:15 Residents of Mareshah, a conqueror will attack you, the leaders of Israel shall flee to Adullam.
MIC 1:16 Shave your heads bald as you mourn for the children you love; shave your foreheads as bald as an eagle, for they are taken from you into exile.
MIC 2:1 Those who devise sinful plans are as good as dead, those who dream about doing evil as they lie in bed. As soon as morning dawns they carry out their plans, because they have the power to do so.
MIC 2:2 They confiscate the fields they desire, and seize the houses they want. They defraud people of their homes, and deprive people of the land they have inherited.
MIC 2:3 Therefore the Lord says this: “Look, I am devising disaster for this nation! It will be like a yoke from which you cannot free your neck. You will no longer walk proudly, for it will be a time of catastrophe.
MIC 2:4 In that day people will sing this taunt song to you – they will mock you with this lament: ‘We are completely destroyed; they sell off the property of my people. How they remove it from me! They assign our fields to the conqueror.’
MIC 2:5 Therefore no one will assign you land in the Lord’s community.
MIC 2:6 ‘Don’t preach with such impassioned rhetoric,’ they say excitedly. ‘These prophets should not preach of such things; we will not be overtaken by humiliation.’
MIC 2:7 Does the family of Jacob say, ‘The Lord’s patience can’t be exhausted – he would never do such things’? To be sure, my commands bring a reward for those who obey them,
MIC 2:8 but you rise up as an enemy against my people. You steal a robe from a friend, from those who pass by peacefully as if returning from a war.
MIC 2:9 You wrongly evict widows among my people from their cherished homes. You defraud their children of their prized inheritance.
MIC 2:10 But you are the ones who will be forced to leave! For this land is not secure! Sin will thoroughly destroy it!
MIC 2:11 If a lying windbag should come and say, ‘I’ll promise you blessings of wine and beer,’ he would be just the right preacher for these people!
MIC 2:12 I will certainly gather all of you, O Jacob, I will certainly assemble those Israelites who remain. I will bring them together like sheep in a fold, like a flock in the middle of a pasture; they will be so numerous that they will make a lot of noise.
MIC 2:13 The one who can break through barriers will lead them out they will break out, pass through the gate, and leave. Their king will advance before them, The Lord himself will lead them.
MIC 3:1 I said, “Listen, you leaders of Jacob, you rulers of the nation of Israel! You ought to know what is just,
MIC 3:2 yet you hate what is good, and love what is evil. You flay my people’s skin and rip the flesh from their bones.
MIC 3:3 You devour my people’s flesh, strip off their skin, and crush their bones. You chop them up like flesh in a pot – like meat in a kettle.
MIC 3:4 Someday these sinners will cry to the Lord for help, but he will not answer them. He will hide his face from them at that time, because they have done such wicked deeds.”
MIC 3:5 This is what the Lord says: “The prophets who mislead my people are as good as dead. If someone gives them enough to eat, they offer an oracle of peace. But if someone does not give them food, they are ready to declare war on him.
MIC 3:6 Therefore night will fall, and you will receive no visions; it will grow dark, and you will no longer be able to read the omens. The sun will set on these prophets, and the daylight will turn to darkness over their heads.
MIC 3:7 The prophets will be ashamed; the omen readers will be humiliated. All of them will cover their mouths, for they will receive no divine oracles.”
MIC 3:8 But I am full of the courage that the Lord’s Spirit gives, and have a strong commitment to justice. This enables me to confront Jacob with its rebellion, and Israel with its sin.
MIC 3:9 Listen to this, you leaders of the family of Jacob, you rulers of the nation of Israel! You hate justice and pervert all that is right.
MIC 3:10 You build Zion through bloody crimes, Jerusalem through unjust violence.
MIC 3:11 Her leaders take bribes when they decide legal cases, her priests proclaim rulings for profit, and her prophets read omens for pay. Yet they claim to trust the Lord and say, “The Lord is among us. Disaster will not overtake us!”
MIC 3:12 Therefore, because of you, Zion will be plowed up like a field, Jerusalem will become a heap of ruins, and the Temple Mount will become a hill overgrown with brush!
MIC 4:1 In the future the Lord’s Temple Mount will be the most important mountain of all; it will be more prominent than other hills. People will stream to it.
MIC 4:2 Many nations will come, saying, “Come on! Let’s go up to the Lord’s mountain, to the temple of Jacob’s God, so he can teach us his commands and we can live by his laws.” For Zion will be the source of instruction; the Lord’s teachings will proceed from Jerusalem.
MIC 4:3 He will arbitrate between many peoples and settle disputes between many distant nations. They will beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nations will not use weapons against other nations, and they will no longer train for war.
MIC 4:4 Each will sit under his own grapevine or under his own fig tree without any fear. The Lord who commands armies has decreed it.
MIC 4:5 Though all the nations follow their respective gods, we will follow the Lord our God forever.
MIC 4:6 “In that day,” says the Lord, “I will gather the lame, and assemble the outcasts whom I injured.
MIC 4:7 I will transform the lame into the nucleus of a new nation, and those far off into a mighty nation. The Lord will reign over them on Mount Zion, from that day forward and forevermore.”
MIC 4:8 As for you, watchtower for the flock, fortress of Daughter Zion – your former dominion will be restored, the sovereignty that belongs to Daughter Jerusalem.
MIC 4:9 Jerusalem, why are you now shouting so loudly? Has your king disappeared? Has your wise leader been destroyed? Is this why pain grips you as if you were a woman in labor?
MIC 4:10 Twist and strain, Daughter Zion, as if you were in labor! For you will leave the city and live in the open field. You will go to Babylon, but there you will be rescued. There the Lord will deliver you from the power of your enemies.
MIC 4:11 Many nations have now assembled against you. They say, “Jerusalem must be desecrated, so we can gloat over Zion!”
MIC 4:12 But they do not know what the Lord is planning; they do not understand his strategy. He has gathered them like stalks of grain to be threshed at the threshing floor.
MIC 4:13 “Get up and thresh, Daughter Zion! For I will give you iron horns; I will give you bronze hooves, and you will crush many nations.” You will devote to the Lord the spoils you take from them, and dedicate their wealth to the sovereign Ruler of the whole earth.
MIC 5:1 But now slash yourself, daughter surrounded by soldiers! We are besieged! With a scepter they strike Israel’s ruler on the side of his face.
MIC 5:2 As for you, Bethlehem Ephrathah, seemingly insignificant among the clans of Judah – from you a king will emerge who will rule over Israel on my behalf, one whose origins are in the distant past.
MIC 5:3 So the Lord will hand the people of Israel over to their enemies until the time when the woman in labor gives birth. Then the rest of the king’s countrymen will return to be reunited with the people of Israel.
MIC 5:4 He will assume his post and shepherd the people by the Lord’s strength, by the sovereign authority of the Lord his God. They will live securely, for at that time he will be honored even in the distant regions of the earth.
MIC 5:5 He will give us peace. Should the Assyrians try to invade our land and attempt to set foot in our fortresses, we will send against them seven shepherd-rulers, make that eight commanders.
MIC 5:6 They will rule the land of Assyria with the sword, the land of Nimrod with a drawn sword. Our king will rescue us from the Assyrians should they attempt to invade our land and try to set foot in our territory.
MIC 5:7 Those survivors from Jacob will live in the midst of many nations. They will be like the dew the Lord sends, like the rain on the grass, that does not hope for men to come or wait around for humans to arrive.
MIC 5:8 Those survivors from Jacob will live among the nations, in the midst of many peoples. They will be like a lion among the animals of the forest, like a young lion among the flocks of sheep, which attacks when it passes through; it rips its prey and there is no one to stop it.
MIC 5:9 Lift your hand triumphantly against your adversaries; may all your enemies be destroyed!
MIC 5:10 “In that day,” says the Lord, “I will destroy your horses from your midst, and smash your chariots.
MIC 5:11 I will destroy the cities of your land, and tear down all your fortresses.
MIC 5:12 I will remove the sorcery that you practice, and you will no longer have omen readers living among you.
MIC 5:13 I will remove your idols and sacred pillars from your midst; you will no longer worship what your own hands made.
MIC 5:14 I will uproot your images of Asherah from your midst, and destroy your idols.
MIC 5:15 I will angrily seek vengeance on the nations that do not obey me.”
MIC 6:1 Listen to what the Lord says: “Get up! Defend yourself before the mountains! Present your case before the hills!”
MIC 6:2 Hear the Lord’s accusation, you mountains, you enduring foundations of the earth! For the Lord has a case against his people; he has a dispute with Israel!
MIC 6:3 “My people, how have I wronged you? How have I wearied you? Answer me!
MIC 6:4 In fact, I brought you up from the land of Egypt, I delivered you from that place of slavery. I sent Moses, Aaron, and Miriam to lead you.
MIC 6:5 My people, recall how King Balak of Moab planned to harm you, how Balaam son of Beor responded to him. Recall how you journeyed from Shittim to Gilgal, so you might acknowledge that the Lord has treated you fairly.”
MIC 6:6 With what should I enter the Lord’s presence? With what should I bow before the sovereign God? Should I enter his presence with burnt offerings, with year-old calves?
MIC 6:7 Will the Lord accept a thousand rams, or ten thousand streams of olive oil? Should I give him my firstborn child as payment for my rebellion, my offspring – my own flesh and blood – for my sin?
MIC 6:8 He has told you, O man, what is good, and what the Lord really wants from you: He wants you to promote justice, to be faithful, and to live obediently before your God.
MIC 6:9 Listen! The Lord is calling to the city! It is wise to respect your authority, O Lord! Listen, O nation, and those assembled in the city!
MIC 6:10 “I will not overlook, O sinful house, the dishonest gain you have hoarded away, or the smaller-than-standard measure I hate so much.
MIC 6:11 I do not condone the use of rigged scales, or a bag of deceptive weights.
MIC 6:12 The city’s rich men think nothing of resorting to violence; her inhabitants lie, their tongues speak deceptive words.
MIC 6:13 I will strike you brutally and destroy you because of your sin.
MIC 6:14 You will eat, but not be satisfied. Even if you have the strength to overtake some prey, you will not be able to carry it away; if you do happen to carry away something, I will deliver it over to the sword.
MIC 6:15 You will plant crops, but will not harvest them; you will squeeze oil from the olives, but you will have no oil to rub on your bodies; you will squeeze juice from the grapes, but you will have no wine to drink.
MIC 6:16 You implement the regulations of Omri, and all the practices of Ahab’s dynasty; you follow their policies. Therefore I will make you an appalling sight, the city’s inhabitants will be taunted derisively, and nations will mock all of you.”
MIC 7:1 I am depressed! Indeed, it is as if the summer fruit has been gathered, and the grapes have been harvested. There is no grape cluster to eat, no fresh figs that I crave so much.
MIC 7:2 Faithful men have disappeared from the land; there are no godly men left. They all wait in ambush so they can shed blood; they hunt their own brother with a net.
MIC 7:3 They are determined to be experts at doing evil; government officials and judges take bribes, prominent men make demands, and they all do what is necessary to satisfy them.
MIC 7:4 The best of them is like a thorn; the most godly among them are more dangerous than a row of thorn bushes. The day you try to avoid by posting watchmen – your appointed time of punishment – is on the way, and then you will experience confusion.
MIC 7:5 Do not rely on a friend; do not trust a companion! Don’t even share secrets with the one who lies in your arms!
MIC 7:6 For a son thinks his father is a fool, a daughter challenges her mother, and a daughter-in-law her mother-in-law; a man’s enemies are his own servants.
MIC 7:7 But I will keep watching for the Lord; I will wait for the God who delivers me. My God will hear my lament.
MIC 7:8 My enemies, do not gloat over me! Though I have fallen, I will get up. Though I sit in darkness, the Lord will be my light.
MIC 7:9 I must endure the Lord’s anger, for I have sinned against him. But then he will defend my cause, and accomplish justice on my behalf. He will lead me out into the light; I will experience firsthand his deliverance.
MIC 7:10 When my enemies see this, they will be covered with shame. They say to me, “Where is the Lord your God?” I will gloat over them. Then they will be trampled down like mud in the streets.
MIC 7:11 It will be a day for rebuilding your walls; in that day your boundary will be extended.
MIC 7:12 In that day people will come to you from Assyria as far as Egypt, from Egypt as far as the Euphrates River, from the seacoasts and the mountains.
MIC 7:13 The earth will become desolate because of what its inhabitants have done.
MIC 7:14 Shepherd your people with your shepherd’s rod, the flock that belongs to you, the one that lives alone in a thicket, in the midst of a pastureland. Allow them to graze in Bashan and Gilead, as they did in the old days.
MIC 7:15 “As in the days when you departed from the land of Egypt, I will show you miraculous deeds.”
MIC 7:16 Nations will see this and be disappointed by all their strength, they will put their hands over their mouths, and act as if they were deaf.
MIC 7:17 They will lick the dust like a snake, like serpents crawling on the ground. They will come trembling from their strongholds to the Lord our God; they will be terrified of you.
MIC 7:18 There is no other God like you! You forgive sin and pardon the rebellion of those who remain among your people. You do not remain angry forever, but delight in showing loyal love.
MIC 7:19 You will once again have mercy on us; you will conquer our evil deeds; you will hurl our sins into the depths of the sea.
MIC 7:20 You will be loyal to Jacob and extend your loyal love to Abraham, which you promised on oath to our ancestors in ancient times.
NAH 1:1 The oracle against Nineveh; the book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite:
NAH 1:2 The Lord is a zealous and avenging God; the Lord is avenging and very angry. The Lord takes vengeance against his foes; he sustains his rage against his enemies.
NAH 1:3 The Lord is slow to anger but great in power; the Lord will certainly not allow the wicked to go unpunished. He marches out in the whirlwind and the raging storm; dark storm clouds billow like dust under his feet.
NAH 1:4 He shouts a battle cry against the sea and makes it dry up; he makes all the rivers run dry. Bashan and Carmel wither; the blossom of Lebanon withers.
NAH 1:5 The mountains tremble before him, the hills convulse; the earth is laid waste before him, the world and all its inhabitants are laid waste.
NAH 1:6 No one can withstand his indignation! No one can resist his fierce anger! His wrath is poured out like volcanic fire, boulders are broken up as he approaches.
NAH 1:7 The Lord is good – indeed, he is a fortress in time of distress, and he protects those who seek refuge in him.
NAH 1:8 But with an overwhelming flood he will make a complete end of Nineveh; he will drive his enemies into darkness.
NAH 1:9 Whatever you plot against the Lord, he will completely destroy! Distress will not arise a second time.
NAH 1:10 Surely they will be totally consumed like entangled thorn bushes, like the drink of drunkards, like very dry stubble.
NAH 1:11 From you, O Nineveh, one has marched forth who plots evil against the Lord, a wicked military strategist.
NAH 1:12 This is what the Lord says: “Even though they are powerful – and what is more, even though their army is numerous – nevertheless, they will be destroyed and trickle away! Although I afflicted you, I will afflict you no more.
NAH 1:13 And now, I will break Assyria’s yoke bar from your neck; I will tear apart the shackles that are on you.”
NAH 1:14 The Lord has issued a decree against you: “Your dynasty will come to an end. I will destroy the idols and images in the temples of your gods. I will desecrate your grave – because you are accursed!”
NAH 1:15 Look! A herald is running on the mountains! A messenger is proclaiming deliverance: “Celebrate your sacred festivals, O Judah! Fulfill your sacred vows to praise God! For never again will the wicked Assyrians invade you, they have been completely destroyed.”
NAH 2:1 The watchmen of Nineveh shout: “An enemy who will scatter you is marching out to attack you!” “Guard the rampart! Watch the road! Prepare yourselves for battle! Muster your mighty strength!”
NAH 2:2 For the Lord will restore the majesty of Jacob, as well as the majesty of Israel, though their enemies have plundered them and have destroyed their fields.
NAH 2:3 The shields of his warriors are dyed red; the mighty soldiers are dressed in scarlet garments. The metal fittings of the chariots shine like fire on the day of battle; the soldiers brandish their spears.
NAH 2:4 The chariots race madly through the streets, they rush back and forth in the broad plazas; they look like lightning bolts, they dash here and there like flashes of lightning.
NAH 2:5 The commander orders his officers; they stumble as they advance; they rush to the city wall and they set up the covered siege tower.
NAH 2:6 The sluice gates are opened; the royal palace is deluged and dissolves.
NAH 2:7 Nineveh is taken into exile and is led away; her slave girls moan like doves while they beat their breasts.
NAH 2:8 Nineveh was like a pool of water throughout her days, but now her people are running away; she cries out: “Stop! Stop!” – but no one turns back.
NAH 2:9 Her conquerors cry out: “Plunder the silver! Plunder the gold!” There is no end to the treasure; riches of every kind of precious thing.
NAH 2:10 Destruction, devastation, and desolation! Their hearts faint, their knees tremble, each stomach churns, each face turns pale!
NAH 2:11 Where now is the den of the lions, the feeding place of the young lions, where the lion, lioness, and lion cub once prowled and no one disturbed them?
NAH 2:12 The lion tore apart as much prey as his cubs needed and strangled prey to provide food for his lionesses; he filled his lairs with prey and his dens with torn flesh.
NAH 2:13 “I am against you!” declares the Lord who commands armies: “I will burn your chariots with fire; the sword will devour your young lions; you will no longer prey upon the land; the voices of your messengers will no longer be heard.”
NAH 3:1 Woe to the city guilty of bloodshed! She is full of lies; she is filled with plunder; she has hoarded her spoil!
NAH 3:2 The chariot drivers will crack their whips; the chariot wheels will shake the ground; the chariot horses will gallop; the war chariots will bolt forward!
NAH 3:3 The charioteers will charge ahead; their swords will flash and their spears will glimmer! There will be many people slain; there will be piles of the dead, and countless casualties – so many that people will stumble over the corpses.
NAH 3:4 “Because you have acted like a wanton prostitute – a seductive mistress who practices sorcery, who enslaves nations by her harlotry, and entices peoples by her sorcery –
NAH 3:5 I am against you,” declares the Lord who commands armies. “I will strip off your clothes! I will show your nakedness to the nations and your shame to the kingdoms;
NAH 3:6 I will pelt you with filth; I will treat you with contempt; I will make you a public spectacle.
NAH 3:7 Everyone who sees you will turn away from you in disgust; they will say, ‘Nineveh has been devastated! Who will lament for her?’ There will be no one to comfort you!”
NAH 3:8 You are no more secure than Thebes – she was located on the banks of the Nile; the waters surrounded her, her rampart was the sea, the water was her wall.
NAH 3:9 Cush and Egypt had limitless strength; Put and the Libyans were among her allies.
NAH 3:10 Yet she went into captivity as an exile; even her infants were smashed to pieces at the head of every street. They cast lots for her nobility; all her dignitaries were bound with chains.
NAH 3:11 You too will act like drunkards; you will go into hiding; you too will seek refuge from the enemy.
NAH 3:12 All your fortifications will be like fig trees with first-ripe fruit: If they are shaken, their figs will fall into the mouth of the eater!
NAH 3:13 Your warriors will be like women in your midst; the gates of your land will be wide open to your enemies; fire will consume the bars of your gates.
NAH 3:14 Draw yourselves water for a siege! Strengthen your fortifications! Trample the mud and tread the clay! Make mud bricks to strengthen your walls!
NAH 3:15 There the fire will consume you; the sword will cut you down; it will devour you like the young locust would. Multiply yourself like the young locust; multiply yourself like the flying locust!
NAH 3:16 Increase your merchants more than the stars of heaven! They are like the young locust which sheds its skin and flies away.
NAH 3:17 Your courtiers are like locusts, your officials are like a swarm of locusts! They encamp in the walls on a cold day, yet when the sun rises, they fly away; and no one knows where they are.
NAH 3:18 Your shepherds are sleeping, O king of Assyria! Your officers are slumbering! Your people are scattered like sheep on the mountains and there is no one to regather them!
NAH 3:19 Your destruction is like an incurable wound; your demise is like a fatal injury! All who hear what has happened to you will clap their hands for joy, for no one ever escaped your endless cruelty!
HAB 1:1 The following is the message which God revealed to Habakkuk the prophet:
HAB 1:2 How long, Lord, must I cry for help? But you do not listen! I call out to you, “Violence!” But you do not intervene!
HAB 1:3 Why do you force me to witness injustice? Why do you put up with wrongdoing? Destruction and violence confront me; conflict is present and one must endure strife.
HAB 1:4 For this reason the law lacks power, and justice is never carried out. Indeed, the wicked intimidate the innocent. For this reason justice is perverted.
HAB 1:5 “Look at the nations and pay attention! You will be shocked and amazed! For I will do something in your lifetime that you will not believe even though you are forewarned.
HAB 1:6 Look, I am about to empower the Babylonians, that ruthless and greedy nation. They sweep across the surface of the earth, seizing dwelling places that do not belong to them.
HAB 1:7 They are frightening and terrifying; they decide for themselves what is right.
HAB 1:8 Their horses are faster than leopards and more alert than wolves in the desert. Their horses gallop, their horses come a great distance; like a vulture they swoop down quickly to devour their prey.
HAB 1:9 All of them intend to do violence; every face is determined. They take prisoners as easily as one scoops up sand.
HAB 1:10 They mock kings and laugh at rulers. They laugh at every fortified city; they build siege ramps and capture them.
HAB 1:11 They sweep by like the wind and pass on. But the one who considers himself a god will be held guilty.”
HAB 1:12 Lord, you have been active from ancient times; my sovereign God, you are immortal. Lord, you have made them your instrument of judgment. Protector, you have appointed them as your instrument of punishment.
HAB 1:13 You are too just to tolerate evil; you are unable to condone wrongdoing. So why do you put up with such treacherous people? Why do you say nothing when the wicked devour those more righteous than they are?
HAB 1:14 You made people like fish in the sea, like animals in the sea that have no ruler.
HAB 1:15 The Babylonian tyrant pulls them all up with a fishhook; he hauls them in with his throw net. When he catches them in his dragnet, he is very happy.
HAB 1:16 Because of his success he offers sacrifices to his throw net and burns incense to his dragnet; for because of them he has plenty of food, and more than enough to eat.
HAB 1:17 Will he then continue to fill and empty his throw net? Will he always destroy nations and spare none?
HAB 2:1 I will stand at my watch post; I will remain stationed on the city wall. I will keep watching, so I can see what he says to me and can know how I should answer when he counters my argument.
HAB 2:2 The Lord responded: “Write down this message! Record it legibly on tablets, so the one who announces it may read it easily.
HAB 2:3 For the message is a witness to what is decreed; it gives reliable testimony about how matters will turn out. Even if the message is not fulfilled right away, wait patiently; for it will certainly come to pass – it will not arrive late.
HAB 2:4 Look, the one whose desires are not upright will faint from exhaustion, but the person of integrity will live because of his faithfulness.
HAB 2:5 Indeed, wine will betray the proud, restless man! His appetite is as big as Sheol’s; like death, he is never satisfied. He gathers all the nations; he seizes all peoples.
HAB 2:6 “But all these nations will someday taunt him and ridicule him with proverbial sayings: ‘The one who accumulates what does not belong to him is as good as dead (How long will this go on?) – he who gets rich by extortion!’
HAB 2:7 Your creditors will suddenly attack; those who terrify you will spring into action, and they will rob you.
HAB 2:8 Because you robbed many countries, all who are left among the nations will rob you. You have shed human blood and committed violent acts against lands, cities, and those who live in them.
HAB 2:9 The one who builds his house by unjust gain is as good as dead. He does this so he can build his nest way up high and escape the clutches of disaster.
HAB 2:10 Your schemes will bring shame to your house. Because you destroyed many nations, you will self-destruct.
HAB 2:11 For the stones in the walls will cry out, and the wooden rafters will answer back.
HAB 2:12 The one who builds a city by bloodshed is as good as dead – he who starts a town by unjust deeds.
HAB 2:13 Be sure of this! The Lord who commands armies has decreed: The nations’ efforts will go up in smoke; their exhausting work will be for nothing.
HAB 2:14 For recognition of the Lord’s sovereign majesty will fill the earth just as the waters fill up the sea.
HAB 2:15 “You who force your neighbor to drink wine are as good as dead – you who make others intoxicated by forcing them to drink from the bowl of your furious anger, so you can look at their genitals.
HAB 2:16 But you will become drunk with shame, not majesty. Now it is your turn to drink and expose your uncircumcised foreskin! The cup of wine in the Lord’s right hand is coming to you, and disgrace will replace your majestic glory!
HAB 2:17 For you will pay in full for your violent acts against Lebanon; terrifying judgment will come upon you because of the way you destroyed the wild animals living there. You have shed human blood and committed violent acts against lands, cities, and those who live in them.
HAB 2:18 What good is an idol? Why would a craftsman make it? What good is a metal image that gives misleading oracles? Why would its creator place his trust in it and make such mute, worthless things?
HAB 2:19 The one who says to wood, ‘Wake up!’ is as good as dead – he who says to speechless stone, ‘Awake!’ Can it give reliable guidance? It is overlaid with gold and silver; it has no life’s breath inside it.
HAB 2:20 But the Lord is in his majestic palace. The whole earth is speechless in his presence!”
HAB 3:1 This is a prayer of Habakkuk the prophet:
HAB 3:2 Lord, I have heard the report of what you did; I am awed, Lord, by what you accomplished. In our time repeat those deeds; in our time reveal them again. But when you cause turmoil, remember to show us mercy!
HAB 3:3 God comes from Teman, the sovereign one from Mount Paran. Selah. His splendor covers the skies, his glory fills the earth.
HAB 3:4 He is as bright as lightning; a two-pronged lightning bolt flashes from his hand. This is the outward display of his power.
HAB 3:5 Plague goes before him; pestilence marches right behind him.
HAB 3:6 He takes his battle position and shakes the earth; with a mere look he frightens the nations. The ancient mountains disintegrate; the primeval hills are flattened. He travels on the ancient roads.
HAB 3:7 I see the tents of Cushan overwhelmed by trouble; the tent curtains of the land of Midian are shaking.
HAB 3:8 Is the Lord mad at the rivers? Are you angry with the rivers? Are you enraged at the sea? Is this why you climb into your horse-drawn chariots, your victorious chariots?
HAB 3:9 Your bow is ready for action; you commission your arrows. Selah. You cause flash floods on the earth’s surface.
HAB 3:10 When the mountains see you, they shake. The torrential downpour sweeps through. The great deep shouts out; it lifts its hands high.
HAB 3:11 The sun and moon stand still in their courses; the flash of your arrows drives them away, the bright light of your lightning-quick spear.
HAB 3:12 You furiously stomp on the earth, you angrily trample down the nations.
HAB 3:13 You march out to deliver your people, to deliver your special servant. You strike the leader of the wicked nation, laying him open from the lower body to the neck. Selah.
HAB 3:14 You pierce the heads of his warriors with a spear. They storm forward to scatter us; they shout with joy as if they were plundering the poor with no opposition.
HAB 3:15 But you trample on the sea with your horses, on the surging, raging waters.
HAB 3:16 I listened and my stomach churned; the sound made my lips quiver. My frame went limp, as if my bones were decaying, and I shook as I tried to walk. I long for the day of distress to come upon the people who attack us.
HAB 3:17 When the fig tree does not bud, and there are no grapes on the vines; when the olive trees do not produce, and the fields yield no crops; when the sheep disappear from the pen, and there are no cattle in the stalls,
HAB 3:18 I will rejoice because of the Lord; I will be happy because of the God who delivers me!
HAB 3:19 The sovereign Lord is my source of strength. He gives me the agility of a deer; he enables me to negotiate the rugged terrain. (This prayer is for the song leader. It is to be accompanied by stringed instruments.)
ZEP 1:1 This is the prophetic message that the Lord gave to Zephaniah son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hezekiah. Zephaniah delivered this message during the reign of King Josiah son of Amon of Judah:
ZEP 1:2 “I will destroy everything from the face of the earth,” says the Lord.
ZEP 1:3 “I will destroy people and animals; I will destroy the birds in the sky and the fish in the sea. (The idolatrous images of these creatures will be destroyed along with evil people.) I will remove humanity from the face of the earth,” says the Lord.
ZEP 1:4 “I will attack Judah and all who live in Jerusalem. I will remove from this place every trace of Baal worship, as well as the very memory of the pagan priests.
ZEP 1:5 I will remove those who worship the stars in the sky from their rooftops, those who swear allegiance to the Lord while taking oaths in the name of their ‘king,’
ZEP 1:6 and those who turn their backs on the Lord and do not want the Lord’s help or guidance.”
ZEP 1:7 Be silent before the Lord God, for the Lord’s day of judgment is almost here. The Lord has prepared a sacrificial meal; he has ritually purified his guests.
ZEP 1:8 “On the day of the Lord’s sacrificial meal, I will punish the princes and the king’s sons, and all who wear foreign styles of clothing.
ZEP 1:9 On that day I will punish all who leap over the threshold, who fill the house of their master with wealth taken by violence and deceit.
ZEP 1:10 On that day,” says the Lord, “a loud cry will go up from the Fish Gate, wailing from the city’s newer district, and a loud crash from the hills.
ZEP 1:11 Wail, you who live in the market district, for all the merchants will disappear and those who count money will be removed.
ZEP 1:12 At that time I will search through Jerusalem with lamps. I will punish the people who are entrenched in their sin, those who think to themselves, ‘The Lord neither rewards nor punishes.’
ZEP 1:13 Their wealth will be stolen and their houses ruined! They will not live in the houses they have built, nor will they drink the wine from the vineyards they have planted.
ZEP 1:14 The Lord’s great day of judgment is almost here; it is approaching very rapidly! There will be a bitter sound on the Lord’s day of judgment; at that time warriors will cry out in battle.
ZEP 1:15 That day will be a day of God’s anger, a day of distress and hardship, a day of devastation and ruin, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds and dark skies,
ZEP 1:16 a day of trumpet blasts and battle cries. Judgment will fall on the fortified cities and the high corner towers.
ZEP 1:17 I will bring distress on the people and they will stumble like blind men, for they have sinned against the Lord. Their blood will be poured out like dirt; their flesh will be scattered like manure.
ZEP 1:18 Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s angry judgment. The whole earth will be consumed by his fiery wrath. Indeed, he will bring terrifying destruction on all who live on the earth.”
ZEP 2:1 Bunch yourselves together like straw, you undesirable nation,
ZEP 2:2 before God’s decree becomes reality and the day of opportunity disappears like windblown chaff, before the Lord’s raging anger overtakes you – before the day of the Lord’s angry judgment overtakes you!
ZEP 2:3 Seek the Lord’s favor, all you humble people of the land who have obeyed his commands! Strive to do what is right! Strive to be humble! Maybe you will be protected on the day of the Lord’s angry judgment.
ZEP 2:4 Indeed, Gaza will be deserted and Ashkelon will become a heap of ruins. Invaders will drive away the people of Ashdod by noon, and Ekron will be overthrown.
ZEP 2:5 Those who live by the sea, the people who came from Crete, are as good as dead. The Lord has decreed your downfall, Canaan, land of the Philistines: “I will destroy everyone who lives there!”
ZEP 2:6 The seacoast will be used as pasture lands by the shepherds and as pens for their flocks.
ZEP 2:7 Those who are left from the kingdom of Judah will take possession of it. By the sea they will graze, in the houses of Ashkelon they will lie down in the evening, for the Lord their God will intervene for them and restore their prosperity.
ZEP 2:8 “I have heard Moab’s taunts and the Ammonites’ insults. They taunted my people and verbally harassed those living in Judah.
ZEP 2:9 Therefore, as surely as I live,” says the Lord who commands armies, the God of Israel, “be certain that Moab will become like Sodom and the Ammonites like Gomorrah. They will be overrun by weeds, filled with salt pits, and permanently desolate. Those of my people who are left will plunder their belongings; those who are left in Judah will take possession of their land.”
ZEP 2:10 This is how they will be repaid for their arrogance, for they taunted and verbally harassed the people of the Lord who commands armies.
ZEP 2:11 The Lord will terrify them, for he will weaken all the gods of the earth. All the distant nations will worship the Lord in their own lands.
ZEP 2:12 “You Ethiopians will also die by my sword!”
ZEP 2:13 The Lord will attack the north and destroy Assyria. He will make Nineveh a heap of ruins; it will be as barren as the desert.
ZEP 2:14 Flocks and herds will lie down in the middle of it, as well as every kind of wild animal. Owls will sleep in the tops of its support pillars; they will hoot through the windows. Rubble will cover the thresholds; even the cedar work will be exposed to the elements.
ZEP 2:15 This is how the once-proud city will end up – the city that was so secure. She thought to herself, “I am unique! No one can compare to me!” What a heap of ruins she has become, a place where wild animals live! Everyone who passes by her taunts her and shakes his fist.
ZEP 3:1 The filthy, stained city is as good as dead; the city filled with oppressors is finished!
ZEP 3:2 She is disobedient; she refuses correction. She does not trust the Lord; she does not seek the advice of her God.
ZEP 3:3 Her princes are as fierce as roaring lions; her rulers are as hungry as wolves in the desert, who completely devour their prey by morning.
ZEP 3:4 Her prophets are proud; they are deceitful men. Her priests defile what is holy; they break God’s laws.
ZEP 3:5 The just Lord resides within her; he commits no unjust acts. Every morning he reveals his justice. At dawn he appears without fail. Yet the unjust know no shame.
ZEP 3:6 “I destroyed nations; their walled cities are in ruins. I turned their streets into ruins; no one passes through them. Their cities are desolate; no one lives there.
ZEP 3:7 I thought, ‘Certainly you will respect me! Now you will accept correction!’ If she had done so, her home would not be destroyed by all the punishments I have threatened. But they eagerly sinned in everything they did.
ZEP 3:8 Therefore you must wait patiently for me,” says the Lord, “for the day when I attack and take plunder. I have decided to gather nations together and assemble kingdoms, so I can pour out my fury on them – all my raging anger. For the whole earth will be consumed by my fiery anger.
ZEP 3:9 Know for sure that I will then enable the nations to give me acceptable praise. All of them will invoke the Lord’s name when they pray, and will worship him in unison.
ZEP 3:10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, those who pray to me will bring me tribute.
ZEP 3:11 In that day you will not be ashamed of all your rebelliousness against me, for then I will remove from your midst those who proudly boast, and you will never again be arrogant on my holy hill.
ZEP 3:12 I will leave in your midst a humble and meek group of people, and they will find safety in the Lord’s presence.
ZEP 3:13 The Israelites who remain will not act deceitfully. They will not lie, and a deceitful tongue will not be found in their mouth. Indeed, they will graze peacefully like sheep and lie down; no one will terrify them.”
ZEP 3:14 Shout for joy, Daughter Zion! Shout out, Israel! Be happy and boast with all your heart, Daughter Jerusalem!
ZEP 3:15 The Lord has removed the judgment against you; he has turned back your enemy. Israel’s king, the Lord, is in your midst! You no longer need to fear disaster.
ZEP 3:16 On that day they will say to Jerusalem, “Don’t be afraid, Zion! Your hands must not be paralyzed from panic!
ZEP 3:17 The Lord your God is in your midst; he is a warrior who can deliver. He takes great delight in you; he renews you by his love; he shouts for joy over you.”
ZEP 3:18 “As for those who grieve because they cannot attend the festivals – I took them away from you; they became tribute and were a source of shame to you.
ZEP 3:19 Look, at that time I will deal with those who mistreated you. I will rescue the lame sheep and gather together the scattered sheep. I will take away their humiliation and make the whole earth admire and respect them.
ZEP 3:20 At that time I will lead you – at the time I gather you together. Be sure of this! I will make all the nations of the earth respect and admire you when you see me restore you,” says the Lord.
HAG 1:1 On the first day of the sixth month of King Darius’ second year, the Lord spoke this message through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak:
HAG 1:2 The Lord who rules over all says this: “These people have said, ‘The time for rebuilding the Lord’s temple has not yet come.’”
HAG 1:3 So the Lord spoke through the prophet Haggai as follows:
HAG 1:4 “Is it right for you to live in richly paneled houses while my temple is in ruins?
HAG 1:5 Here then is what the Lord who rules over all says: ‘Think carefully about what you are doing.
HAG 1:6 You have planted much, but have harvested little. You eat, but are never filled. You drink, but are still thirsty. You put on clothes, but are not warm. Those who earn wages end up with holes in their money bags.’”
HAG 1:7 “Moreover, the Lord who rules over all says: ‘Pay close attention to these things also.
HAG 1:8 Go up to the hill country and bring back timber to build the temple. Then I will be pleased and honored,’ says the Lord.
HAG 1:9 ‘You expected a large harvest, but instead there was little, and when you brought it home it disappeared right away. Why?’ asks the Lord who rules over all. ‘Because my temple remains in ruins, thanks to each of you favoring his own house!
HAG 1:10 This is why the sky has held back its dew and the earth its produce.
HAG 1:11 Moreover, I have called for a drought that will affect the fields, the hill country, the grain, new wine, fresh olive oil, and everything that grows from the ground; it also will harm people, animals, and everything they produce.’”
HAG 1:12 Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak, along with the whole remnant of the people, obeyed the Lord their God. They responded favorably to the message of the prophet Haggai, who spoke just as the Lord their God had instructed him, and the people began to respect the Lord.
HAG 1:13 Then Haggai, the Lord’s messenger, spoke the Lord’s word to the people: “I am with you!” says the Lord.
HAG 1:14 So the Lord energized and encouraged Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak, and the whole remnant of the people. They came and worked on the temple of their God, the Lord who rules over all.
HAG 1:15 This took place on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month of King Darius’ second year.
HAG 2:1 On the twenty-first day of the seventh month, the Lord spoke again through the prophet Haggai:
HAG 2:2 “Ask the following questions to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak, and the remnant of the people:
HAG 2:3 ‘Who among you survivors saw the former splendor of this temple? How does it look to you now? Isn’t it nothing by comparison?
HAG 2:4 Even so, take heart, Zerubbabel,’ says the Lord. ‘Take heart, Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and all you citizens of the land,’ says the Lord, ‘and begin to work. For I am with you,’ says the Lord who rules over all.
HAG 2:5 ‘Do not fear, because I made a promise to your ancestors when they left Egypt, and my spirit even now testifies to you.’
HAG 2:6 Moreover, the Lord who rules over all says: ‘In just a little while I will once again shake the sky and the earth, the sea and the dry ground.
HAG 2:7 I will also shake up all the nations, and they will offer their treasures; then I will fill this temple with glory,’ says the Lord who rules over all.
HAG 2:8 ‘The silver and gold will be mine,’ says the Lord who rules over all.
HAG 2:9 ‘The future splendor of this temple will be greater than that of former times,’ the Lord who rules over all declares, ‘and in this place I will give peace.’”
HAG 2:10 On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month of Darius’ second year, the Lord spoke again to the prophet Haggai:
HAG 2:11 “The Lord who rules over all says, ‘Ask the priests about the law.
HAG 2:12 If someone carries holy meat in a fold of his garment and that fold touches bread, a boiled dish, wine, olive oil, or any other food, will that item become holy?’” The priests answered, “It will not.”
HAG 2:13 Then Haggai asked, “If a person who is ritually unclean because of touching a dead body comes in contact with one of these items, will it become unclean?” The priests answered, “It will be unclean.”
HAG 2:14 Then Haggai responded, “‘The people of this nation are unclean in my sight,’ says the Lord. ‘And so is all their effort; everything they offer is also unclean.
HAG 2:15 Now therefore reflect carefully on the recent past, before one stone was laid on another in the Lord’s temple.
HAG 2:16 From that time when one came expecting a heap of twenty measures, there were only ten; when one came to the wine vat to draw out fifty measures from it, there were only twenty.
HAG 2:17 I struck all the products of your labor with blight, disease, and hail, and yet you brought nothing to me,’ says the Lord.
HAG 2:18 ‘Think carefully about the past: from today, the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, to the day work on the temple of the Lord was resumed, think about it.
HAG 2:19 The seed is still in the storehouse, isn’t it? And the vine, fig tree, pomegranate, and olive tree have not produced. Nevertheless, from today on I will bless you.’”
HAG 2:20 Then the Lord spoke again to Haggai on the twenty-fourth day of the month:
HAG 2:21 Tell Zerubbabel governor of Judah: ‘I am ready to shake the sky and the earth.
HAG 2:22 I will overthrow royal thrones and shatter the might of earthly kingdoms. I will overthrow chariots and those who ride them, and horses and their riders will fall as people kill one another.
HAG 2:23 On that day,’ says the Lord who rules over all, ‘I will take you, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, my servant,’ says the Lord, ‘and I will make you like a signet ring, for I have chosen you,’ says the Lord who rules over all.”
ZEC 1:1 In the eighth month of Darius’ second year, the word of the Lord came to the prophet Zechariah, son of Berechiah son of Iddo, as follows:
ZEC 1:2 The Lord was very angry with your ancestors.
ZEC 1:3 Therefore say to the people: The Lord who rules over all says, “Turn to me,” says the Lord who rules over all, “and I will turn to you,” says the Lord who rules over all.
ZEC 1:4 “Do not be like your ancestors, to whom the former prophets called out, saying, ‘The Lord who rules over all says, “Turn now from your evil wickedness,”’ but they would by no means obey me,” says the Lord.
ZEC 1:5 “As for your ancestors, where are they? And did the prophets live forever?
ZEC 1:6 But have my words and statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, not outlived your fathers? Then they paid attention and confessed, ‘The Lord who rules over all has indeed done what he said he would do to us, because of our sinful ways.’”
ZEC 1:7 On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, the month Shebat, in Darius’ second year, the word of the Lord came to the prophet Zechariah son of Berechiah son of Iddo, as follows:
ZEC 1:8 I was attentive that night and saw a man seated on a red horse that stood among some myrtle trees in the ravine. Behind him were red, sorrel, and white horses.
ZEC 1:9 Then I asked one nearby, “What are these, sir?” The angelic messenger who replied to me said, “I will show you what these are.”
ZEC 1:10 Then the man standing among the myrtle trees spoke up and said, “These are the ones whom the Lord has sent to walk about on the earth.”
ZEC 1:11 The riders then agreed with the angel of the Lord, who was standing among the myrtle trees, “We have been walking about on the earth, and now everything is at rest and quiet.”
ZEC 1:12 The angel of the Lord then asked, “Lord who rules over all, how long before you have compassion on Jerusalem and the other cities of Judah which you have been so angry with for these seventy years?”
ZEC 1:13 The Lord then addressed good, comforting words to the angelic messenger who was speaking to me.
ZEC 1:14 Turning to me, the messenger then said, “Cry out that the Lord who rules over all says, ‘I am very much moved for Jerusalem and for Zion.
ZEC 1:15 But I am greatly displeased with the nations that take my grace for granted. I was a little displeased with them, but they have only made things worse for themselves.
ZEC 1:16 “‘Therefore,’ says the Lord, ‘I have become compassionate toward Jerusalem and will rebuild my temple in it,’ says the Lord who rules over all. ‘Once more a surveyor’s measuring line will be stretched out over Jerusalem.’
ZEC 1:17 Speak up again with the message of the Lord who rules over all: ‘My cities will once more overflow with prosperity, and once more the Lord will comfort Zion and validate his choice of Jerusalem.’”
ZEC 1:18 Once again I looked and this time I saw four horns.
ZEC 1:19 So I asked the angelic messenger who spoke with me, “What are these?” He replied, “These are the horns that have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.”
ZEC 1:20 Next the Lord showed me four blacksmiths.
ZEC 1:21 I asked, “What are these going to do?” He answered, “These horns are the ones that have scattered Judah so that there is no one to be seen. But the blacksmiths have come to terrify Judah’s enemies and cut off the horns of the nations that have thrust themselves against the land of Judah in order to scatter its people.”
ZEC 2:1 I looked again, and there was a man with a measuring line in his hand.
ZEC 2:2 I asked, “Where are you going?” He replied, “To measure Jerusalem in order to determine its width and its length.”
ZEC 2:3 At this point the angelic messenger who spoke to me went out, and another messenger came to meet him
ZEC 2:4 and said to him, “Hurry, speak to this young man as follows: ‘Jerusalem will no longer be enclosed by walls because of the multitude of people and animals there.
ZEC 2:5 But I (the Lord says) will be a wall of fire surrounding Jerusalem and the source of glory in her midst.’”
ZEC 2:6 “You there! Flee from the northland!” says the Lord, “for like the four winds of heaven I have scattered you,” says the Lord.
ZEC 2:7 “Escape, Zion, you who live among the Babylonians!”
ZEC 2:8 For the Lord who rules over all says to me that for his own glory he has sent me to the nations that plundered you – for anyone who touches you touches the pupil of his eye.
ZEC 2:9 “I am about to punish them in such a way,” he says, “that they will be looted by their own slaves.” Then you will know that the Lord who rules over all has sent me.
ZEC 2:10 “Sing out and be happy, Zion my daughter! For look, I have come; I will settle in your midst,” says the Lord.
ZEC 2:11 “Many nations will join themselves to the Lord on the day of salvation, and they will also be my people. Indeed, I will settle in the midst of you all.” Then you will know that the Lord who rules over all has sent me to you.
ZEC 2:12 The Lord will take possession of Judah as his portion in the holy land and he will choose Jerusalem once again.
ZEC 2:13 Be silent in the Lord’s presence, all people everywhere, for he is being moved to action in his holy dwelling place.
ZEC 3:1 Next I saw Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, with Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him.
ZEC 3:2 The Lord said to Satan, “May the Lord rebuke you, Satan! May the Lord, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Isn’t this man like a burning stick snatched from the fire?”
ZEC 3:3 Now Joshua was dressed in filthy clothes as he stood there before the angel.
ZEC 3:4 The angel spoke up to those standing all around, “Remove his filthy clothes.” Then he said to Joshua, “I have freely forgiven your iniquity and will dress you in fine clothing.”
ZEC 3:5 Then I spoke up, “Let a clean turban be put on his head.” So they put a clean turban on his head and clothed him, while the angel of the Lord stood nearby.
ZEC 3:6 Then the angel of the Lord exhorted Joshua solemnly:
ZEC 3:7 “The Lord who rules over all says, ‘If you live and work according to my requirements, you will be able to preside over my temple and attend to my courtyards, and I will allow you to come and go among these others who are standing by you.
ZEC 3:8 Listen now, Joshua the high priest, both you and your colleagues who are sitting before you, all of you are a symbol that I am about to introduce my servant, the Branch.
ZEC 3:9 As for the stone I have set before Joshua – on the one stone there are seven eyes. I am about to engrave an inscription on it,’ says the Lord who rules over all, ‘to the effect that I will remove the iniquity of this land in a single day.
ZEC 3:10 In that day,’ says the Lord who rules over all, ‘everyone will invite his friend to fellowship under his vine and under his fig tree.’”
ZEC 4:1 The angelic messenger who had been speaking with me then returned and woke me, as a person is wakened from sleep.
ZEC 4:2 He asked me, “What do you see?” I replied, “I see a menorah of pure gold with a receptacle at the top and seven lamps, with fourteen pipes going to the lamps.
ZEC 4:3 There are also two olive trees beside it, one on the right of the receptacle and the other on the left.”
ZEC 4:4 Then I asked the messenger who spoke with me, “What are these, sir?”
ZEC 4:5 He replied, “Don’t you know what these are?” So I responded, “No, sir.”
ZEC 4:6 Therefore he told me, “These signify the word of the Lord to Zerubbabel: ‘Not by strength and not by power, but by my Spirit,’ says the Lord who rules over all.”
ZEC 4:7 “What are you, you great mountain? Because of Zerubbabel you will become a level plain! And he will bring forth the temple capstone with shoutings of ‘Grace! Grace!’ because of this.”
ZEC 4:8 Moreover, the word of the Lord came to me as follows:
ZEC 4:9 “The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundations of this temple, and his hands will complete it.” Then you will know that the Lord who rules over all has sent me to you.
ZEC 4:10 For who dares make light of small beginnings? These seven eyes will joyfully look on the tin tablet in Zerubbabel’s hand. (These are the eyes of the Lord, which constantly range across the whole earth.)
ZEC 4:11 Next I asked the messenger, “What are these two olive trees on the right and the left of the menorah?”
ZEC 4:12 Before he could reply I asked again, “What are these two extensions of the olive trees, which are emptying out the golden oil through the two golden pipes?”
ZEC 4:13 He replied, “Don’t you know what these are?” And I said, “No, sir.”
ZEC 4:14 So he said, “These are the two anointed ones who stand by the Lord of the whole earth.”
ZEC 5:1 Then I turned to look, and there was a flying scroll!
ZEC 5:2 Someone asked me, “What do you see?” I replied, “I see a flying scroll thirty feet long and fifteen feet wide.”
ZEC 5:3 The speaker went on to say, “This is a curse traveling across the whole earth. For example, according to the curse whoever steals will be removed from the community; or on the other hand (according to the curse) whoever swears falsely will suffer the same fate.”
ZEC 5:4 “I will send it out,” says the Lord who rules over all, “and it will enter the house of the thief and of the person who swears falsely in my name. It will land in the middle of his house and destroy both timber and stones.”
ZEC 5:5 After this the angelic messenger who had been speaking to me went out and said, “Look, see what is leaving.”
ZEC 5:6 I asked, “What is it?” And he replied, “It is a basket for measuring grain that is moving away from here.” Moreover, he said, “This is their ‘eye’ throughout all the earth.”
ZEC 5:7 Then a round lead cover was raised up, revealing a woman sitting inside the basket.
ZEC 5:8 He then said, “This woman represents wickedness,” and he pushed her down into the basket and placed the lead cover on top.
ZEC 5:9 Then I looked again and saw two women going forth with the wind in their wings (they had wings like those of a stork) and they lifted up the basket between the earth and the sky.
ZEC 5:10 I asked the messenger who was speaking to me, “Where are they taking the basket?”
ZEC 5:11 He replied, “To build a temple for her in the land of Babylonia. When it is finished, she will be placed there in her own residence.”
ZEC 6:1 Once more I looked, and this time I saw four chariots emerging from between two mountains of bronze.
ZEC 6:2 Harnessed to the first chariot were red horses, to the second black horses,
ZEC 6:3 to the third white horses, and to the fourth spotted horses, all of them strong.
ZEC 6:4 Then I asked the angelic messenger who was speaking with me, “What are these, sir?”
ZEC 6:5 The messenger replied, “These are the four spirits of heaven that have been presenting themselves before the Lord of all the earth.
ZEC 6:6 The chariot with the black horses is going to the north country and the white ones are going after them, but the spotted ones are going to the south country.
ZEC 6:7 All these strong ones are scattering; they have sought permission to go and walk about over the earth.” The Lord had said, “Go! Walk about over the earth!” So they are doing so.
ZEC 6:8 Then he cried out to me, “Look! The ones going to the northland have brought me peace about the northland.”
ZEC 6:9 The word of the Lord came to me as follows:
ZEC 6:10 “Choose some people from among the exiles, namely, Heldai, Tobijah, and Jedaiah, all of whom have come from Babylon, and when you have done so go to the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah.
ZEC 6:11 Then take some silver and gold to make a crown and set it on the head of Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest.
ZEC 6:12 Then say to him, ‘The Lord who rules over all says, “Look – here is the man whose name is Branch, who will sprout up from his place and build the temple of the Lord.
ZEC 6:13 Indeed, he will build the temple of the Lord, and he will be clothed in splendor, sitting as king on his throne. Moreover, there will be a priest with him on his throne and they will see eye to eye on everything.
ZEC 6:14 The crown will then be turned over to Helem, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and Hen son of Zephaniah as a memorial in the temple of the Lord.
ZEC 6:15 Then those who are far away will come and build the temple of the Lord so that you may know that the Lord who rules over all has sent me to you. This will all come to pass if you completely obey the voice of the Lord your God.”’”
ZEC 7:1 In King Darius’ fourth year, on the fourth day of Kislev, the ninth month, the word of the Lord came to Zechariah.
ZEC 7:2 Now the people of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-Melech and their companions to seek the Lord’s favor
ZEC 7:3 by asking both the priests of the temple of the Lord who rules over all and the prophets, “Should we weep in the fifth month, fasting as we have done over the years?”
ZEC 7:4 The word of the Lord who rules over all then came to me,
ZEC 7:5 “Speak to all the people and priests of the land as follows: ‘When you fasted and lamented in the fifth and seventh months through all these seventy years, did you truly fast for me – for me, indeed?
ZEC 7:6 And now when you eat and drink, are you not doing so for yourselves?’”
ZEC 7:7 Should you not have obeyed the words that the Lord cried out through the former prophets when Jerusalem was peacefully inhabited and her surrounding cities, the Negev, and the Shephelah were also populated?
ZEC 7:8 Again the word of the Lord came to Zechariah:
ZEC 7:9 “The Lord who rules over all said, ‘Exercise true judgment and show brotherhood and compassion to each other.
ZEC 7:10 You must not oppress the widow, the orphan, the foreigner, or the poor, nor should anyone secretly plot evil against his fellow human being.’
ZEC 7:11 “But they refused to pay attention, turning away stubbornly and stopping their ears so they could not hear.
ZEC 7:12 Indeed, they made their heart as hard as diamond, so that they could not obey the Torah and the other words the Lord who rules over all had sent by his Spirit through the former prophets. Therefore, the Lord who rules over all had poured out great wrath.
ZEC 7:13 “‘It then came about that just as I cried out, but they would not obey, so they will cry out, but I will not listen,’ the Lord Lord who rules over all had said.
ZEC 7:14 ‘Rather, I will sweep them away in a storm into all the nations they are not familiar with.’ Thus the land had become desolate because of them, with no one crossing through or returning, for they had made the fruitful land a waste.”
ZEC 8:1 Then the word of the Lord who rules over all came to me as follows:
ZEC 8:2 “The Lord who rules over all says, ‘I am very much concerned for Zion; indeed, I am so concerned for her that my rage will fall on those who hurt her.’
ZEC 8:3 The Lord says, ‘I have returned to Zion and will live within Jerusalem. Now Jerusalem will be called “truthful city,” “mountain of the Lord who rules over all,” “holy mountain.”’
ZEC 8:4 Moreover, the Lord who rules over all says, ‘Old men and women will once more live in the plazas of Jerusalem, each one leaning on a cane because of advanced age.
ZEC 8:5 And the streets of the city will be full of boys and girls playing.
ZEC 8:6 And,’ says the Lord who rules over all, ‘though such a thing may seem to be difficult in the opinion of the small community of those days, will it also appear difficult to me?’ asks the Lord who rules over all.
ZEC 8:7 “The Lord who rules over all asserts, ‘I am about to save my people from the lands of the east and the west.
ZEC 8:8 And I will bring them to settle within Jerusalem. They will be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and righteousness.’
ZEC 8:9 “The Lord who rules over all also says, ‘Gather strength, you who are listening to these words today from the mouths of the prophets who were there at the founding of the house of the Lord who rules over all, so that the temple might be built.
ZEC 8:10 Before that time there was no compensation for man or animal, nor was there any relief from adversity for those who came and went, because I had pitted everybody – each one – against everyone else.
ZEC 8:11 But I will be different now to this remnant of my people from the way I was in those days,’ says the Lord who rules over all,
ZEC 8:12 ‘for there will be a peaceful time of sowing, the vine will produce its fruit and the ground its yield, and the skies will rain down dew. Then I will allow the remnant of my people to possess all these things.
ZEC 8:13 And it will come about that just as you (both Judah and Israel) were a curse to the nations, so I will save you and you will be a blessing. Do not be afraid! Instead, be strong!’
ZEC 8:14 “For the Lord who rules over all says, ‘As I had planned to hurt you when your fathers made me angry,’ says the Lord who rules over all, ‘and I was not sorry,
ZEC 8:15 so, to the contrary, I have planned in these days to do good to Jerusalem and Judah – do not fear!
ZEC 8:16 These are the things you must do: Speak the truth, each of you, to one another. Practice true and righteous judgment in your courts.
ZEC 8:17 Do not plan evil in your hearts against one another. Do not favor a false oath – these are all things that I hate,’ says the Lord.”
ZEC 8:18 The word of the Lord who rules over all came to me as follows:
ZEC 8:19 “The Lord who rules over all says, ‘The fast of the fourth, fifth, seventh, and tenth months will become joyful and happy, pleasant feasts for the house of Judah, so love truth and peace.’
ZEC 8:20 The Lord who rules over all says, ‘It will someday come to pass that people – residents of many cities – will come.
ZEC 8:21 The inhabitants of one will go to another and say, “Let’s go up at once to ask the favor of the Lord, to seek the Lord who rules over all. Indeed, I’ll go with you.”’
ZEC 8:22 Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord who rules over all and to ask his favor.
ZEC 8:23 The Lord who rules over all says, ‘In those days ten people from all languages and nations will grasp hold of – indeed, grab – the robe of one Jew and say, “Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.”’”
ZEC 9:1 An oracle of the word of the Lord concerning the land of Hadrach, with its focus on Damascus: The eyes of all humanity, especially of the tribes of Israel, are toward the Lord,
ZEC 9:2 as are those of Hamath also, which adjoins Damascus, and Tyre though they consider themselves to be very wise.
ZEC 9:3 Tyre built herself a fortification and piled up silver like dust and gold like the mud of the streets!
ZEC 9:4 Nevertheless the Lord will evict her and shove her fortifications into the sea – she will be consumed by fire.
ZEC 9:5 Ashkelon will see and be afraid; Gaza will be in great anguish, as will Ekron, for her hope will have been dried up. Gaza will lose her king, and Ashkelon will no longer be inhabited.
ZEC 9:6 A mongrel people will live in Ashdod, for I will greatly humiliate the Philistines.
ZEC 9:7 I will take away their abominable religious practices; then those who survive will become a community of believers in our God, like a clan in Judah, and Ekron will be like the Jebusites.
ZEC 9:8 Then I will surround my temple to protect it like a guard from anyone crossing back and forth; so no one will cross over against them anymore as an oppressor, for now I myself have seen it.
ZEC 9:9 Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion! Shout, daughter of Jerusalem! Look! Your king is coming to you: he is legitimate and victorious, humble and riding on a donkey – on a young donkey, the foal of a female donkey.
ZEC 9:10 I will remove the chariot from Ephraim and the warhorse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow will be removed. Then he will announce peace to the nations. His dominion will be from sea to sea and from the Euphrates River to the ends of the earth.
ZEC 9:11 Moreover, as for you, because of our covenant relationship secured with blood, I will release your prisoners from the waterless pit.
ZEC 9:12 Return to the stronghold, you prisoners, with hope; today I declare that I will return double what was taken from you.
ZEC 9:13 I will bend Judah as my bow; I will load the bow with Ephraim, my arrow! I will stir up your sons, Zion, against yours, Greece, and I will make you, Zion, like a warrior’s sword.
ZEC 9:14 Then the Lord will appear above them, and his arrow will shoot forth like lightning; the Lord God will blow the trumpet and will sally forth on the southern storm winds.
ZEC 9:15 The Lord who rules over all will guard them, and they will prevail and overcome with sling stones. Then they will drink, and will become noisy like drunkards, full like the sacrificial basin or like the corners of the altar.
ZEC 9:16 On that day the Lord their God will deliver them as the flock of his people, for they are the precious stones of a crown sparkling over his land.
ZEC 9:17 How precious and fair! Grain will make the young men flourish and new wine the young women.
ZEC 10:1 Ask the Lord for rain in the season of the late spring rains – the Lord who causes thunderstorms – and he will give everyone showers of rain and green growth in the field.
ZEC 10:2 For the household gods have spoken wickedness, the soothsayers have seen a lie, and as for the dreamers, they have disclosed emptiness and give comfort in vain. Therefore the people set out like sheep and become scattered because they have no shepherd.
ZEC 10:3 I am enraged at the shepherds and will punish the lead-goats. For the Lord who rules over all has brought blessing to his flock, the house of Judah, and will transform them into his majestic warhorse.
ZEC 10:4 From him will come the cornerstone, the wall peg, the battle bow, and every ruler.
ZEC 10:5 And they will be like warriors trampling the mud of the streets in battle. They will fight, for the Lord will be with them, and will defeat the enemy cavalry.
ZEC 10:6 “I (says the Lord) will strengthen the kingdom of Judah and deliver the people of Joseph and will bring them back because of my compassion for them. They will be as though I had never rejected them, for I am the Lord their God and therefore I will hear them.
ZEC 10:7 The Ephraimites will be like warriors and will rejoice as if they had drunk wine. Their children will see it and rejoice; they will celebrate in the things of the Lord.
ZEC 10:8 I will signal for them and gather them, for I have already redeemed them; then they will become as numerous as they were before.
ZEC 10:9 Though I scatter them among the nations, they will remember in far-off places – they and their children will sprout forth and return.
ZEC 10:10 I will bring them back from Egypt and gather them from Assyria. I will bring them to the lands of Gilead and Lebanon, for there will not be enough room for them in their own land.
ZEC 10:11 The Lord will cross the sea of storms and will calm its turbulence. The depths of the Nile will dry up, the pride of Assyria will be humbled, and the domination of Egypt will be no more.
ZEC 10:12 Thus I will strengthen them by my power, and they will walk about in my name,” says the Lord.
ZEC 11:1 Open your gates, Lebanon, so that the fire may consume your cedars.
ZEC 11:2 Howl, fir tree, because the cedar has fallen; the majestic trees have been destroyed. Howl, oaks of Bashan, because the impenetrable forest has fallen.
ZEC 11:3 Listen to the howling of shepherds, because their magnificence has been destroyed. Listen to the roaring of young lions, because the thickets of the Jordan have been devastated.
ZEC 11:4 The Lord my God says this: “Shepherd the flock set aside for slaughter.
ZEC 11:5 Those who buy them slaughter them and are not held guilty; those who sell them say, ‘Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich.’ Their own shepherds have no compassion for them.
ZEC 11:6 Indeed, I will no longer have compassion on the people of the land,” says the Lord, “but instead I will turn every last person over to his neighbor and his king. They will devastate the land, and I will not deliver it from them.”
ZEC 11:7 So I began to shepherd the flock destined for slaughter, the most afflicted of all the flock. Then I took two staffs, calling one “Pleasantness” and the other “Binders,” and I tended the flock.
ZEC 11:8 Next I eradicated the three shepherds in one month, for I ran out of patience with them and, indeed, they detested me as well.
ZEC 11:9 I then said, “I will not shepherd you. What is to die, let it die, and what is to be eradicated, let it be eradicated. As for those who survive, let them eat each other’s flesh!”
ZEC 11:10 Then I took my staff “Pleasantness” and cut it in two to annul my covenant that I had made with all the people.
ZEC 11:11 So it was annulled that very day, and then the most afflicted of the flock who kept faith with me knew that that was the word of the Lord.
ZEC 11:12 Then I said to them, “If it seems good to you, pay me my wages, but if not, forget it.” So they weighed out my payment – thirty pieces of silver.
ZEC 11:13 The Lord then said to me, “Throw to the potter that exorbitant sum at which they valued me!” So I took the thirty pieces of silver and threw them to the potter at the temple of the Lord.
ZEC 11:14 Then I cut the second staff “Binders” in two in order to annul the covenant of brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
ZEC 11:15 Again the Lord said to me, “Take up once more the equipment of a foolish shepherd.
ZEC 11:16 Indeed, I am about to raise up a shepherd in the land who will not take heed to the sheep headed to slaughter, will not seek the scattered, and will not heal the injured. Moreover, he will not nourish the one that is healthy but instead will eat the meat of the fat sheep and tear off their hooves.
ZEC 11:17 Woe to the worthless shepherd who abandons the flock! May a sword fall on his arm and his right eye! May his arm wither completely away, and his right eye become completely blind!”
ZEC 12:1 The revelation of the word of the Lord concerning Israel: The Lord – he who stretches out the heavens and lays the foundations of the earth, who forms the human spirit within a person – says,
ZEC 12:2 “I am about to make Jerusalem a cup that brings dizziness to all the surrounding nations; indeed, Judah will also be included when Jerusalem is besieged.
ZEC 12:3 Moreover, on that day I will make Jerusalem a heavy burden for all the nations, and all who try to carry it will be seriously injured; yet all the peoples of the earth will be assembled against it.
ZEC 12:4 In that day,” says the Lord, “I will strike every horse with confusion and its rider with madness. I will pay close attention to the house of Judah, but will strike all the horses of the nations with blindness.
ZEC 12:5 Then the leaders of Judah will say to themselves, ‘The inhabitants of Jerusalem are a means of strength to us through their God, the Lord who rules over all.’
ZEC 12:6 On that day I will make the leaders of Judah like an igniter among sticks and a burning torch among sheaves, and they will burn up all the surrounding nations right and left. Then the people of Jerusalem will settle once more in their place, the city of Jerusalem.
ZEC 12:7 The Lord also will deliver the homes of Judah first, so that the splendor of the kingship of David and of the people of Jerusalem may not exceed that of Judah.
ZEC 12:8 On that day the Lord himself will defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the weakest among them will be like mighty David, and the dynasty of David will be like God, like the angel of the Lord before them.
ZEC 12:9 So on that day I will set out to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.”
ZEC 12:10 “I will pour out on the kingship of David and the population of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and supplication so that they will look to me, the one they have pierced. They will lament for him as one laments for an only son, and there will be a bitter cry for him like the bitter cry for a firstborn.
ZEC 12:11 On that day the lamentation in Jerusalem will be as great as the lamentation at Hadad-Rimmon in the plain of Megiddo.
ZEC 12:12 The land will mourn, clan by clan – the clan of the royal household of David by itself and their wives by themselves; the clan of the family of Nathan by itself and their wives by themselves;
ZEC 12:13 the clan of the descendants of Levi by itself and their wives by themselves; and the clan of the Shimeites by itself and their wives by themselves –
ZEC 12:14 all the clans that remain, each separately with their wives.”
ZEC 13:1 “In that day there will be a fountain opened up for the dynasty of David and the people of Jerusalem to cleanse them from sin and impurity.
ZEC 13:2 And also on that day,” says the Lord who rules over all, “I will remove the names of the idols from the land and they will never again be remembered. Moreover, I will remove the prophets and the unclean spirit from the land.
ZEC 13:3 Then, if anyone prophesies in spite of this, his father and mother to whom he was born will say to him, ‘You cannot live, for you lie in the name of the Lord.’ Then his father and mother to whom he was born will run him through with a sword when he prophesies.
ZEC 13:4 “Therefore, on that day each prophet will be ashamed of his vision when he prophesies and will no longer wear the hairy garment of a prophet to deceive the people.
ZEC 13:5 Instead he will say, ‘I am no prophet – indeed, I am a farmer, for a man has made me his indentured servant since my youth.’
ZEC 13:6 Then someone will ask him, ‘What are these wounds on your chest?’ and he will answer, ‘Some that I received in the house of my friends.’
ZEC 13:7 “Awake, sword, against my shepherd, against the man who is my associate,” says the Lord who rules over all. Strike the shepherd that the flock may be scattered; I will turn my hand against the insignificant ones.
ZEC 13:8 It will happen in all the land, says the Lord, that two-thirds of the people in it will be cut off and die, but one-third will be left in it.
ZEC 13:9 Then I will bring the remaining third into the fire; I will refine them like silver is refined and will test them like gold is tested. They will call on my name and I will answer; I will say, ‘These are my people,’ and they will say, ‘The Lord is my God.’”
ZEC 14:1 A day of the Lord is about to come when your possessions will be divided as plunder in your midst.
ZEC 14:2 For I will gather all the nations against Jerusalem to wage war; the city will be taken, its houses plundered, and the women raped. Then half of the city will go into exile, but the remainder of the people will not be taken away.
ZEC 14:3 Then the Lord will go to battle and fight against those nations, just as he fought battles in ancient days.
ZEC 14:4 On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives which lies to the east of Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives will be split in half from east to west, leaving a great valley. Half the mountain will move northward and the other half southward.
ZEC 14:5 Then you will escape through my mountain valley, for the mountains will extend to Azal. Indeed, you will flee as you fled from the earthquake in the days of King Uzziah of Judah. Then the Lord my God will come with all his holy ones with him.
ZEC 14:6 On that day there will be no light – the sources of light in the heavens will congeal.
ZEC 14:7 It will happen in one day (a day known to the Lord); not in the day or the night, but in the evening there will be light.
ZEC 14:8 Moreover, on that day living waters will flow out from Jerusalem, half of them to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea; it will happen both in summer and in winter.
ZEC 14:9 The Lord will then be king over all the earth. In that day the Lord will be seen as one with a single name.
ZEC 14:10 All the land will change and become like the Arabah from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem will be raised up and will stay in its own place from the Benjamin Gate to the site of the First Gate and on to the Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the royal winepresses.
ZEC 14:11 And people will settle there, and there will no longer be the threat of divine extermination – Jerusalem will dwell in security.
ZEC 14:12 But this will be the nature of the plague with which the Lord will strike all the nations that have fought against Jerusalem: Their flesh will decay while they stand on their feet, their eyes will rot away in their sockets, and their tongues will dissolve in their mouths.
ZEC 14:13 On that day there will be great confusion from the Lord among them; they will seize each other and attack one another violently.
ZEC 14:14 Moreover, Judah will fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of all the surrounding nations will be gathered up – gold, silver, and clothing in great abundance.
ZEC 14:15 This is the kind of plague that will devastate horses, mules, camels, donkeys, and all the other animals in those camps.
ZEC 14:16 Then all who survive from all the nations that came to attack Jerusalem will go up annually to worship the King, the Lord who rules over all, and to observe the Feast of Tabernacles.
ZEC 14:17 But if any of the nations anywhere on earth refuse to go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord who rules over all, they will get no rain.
ZEC 14:18 If the Egyptians will not do so, they will get no rain – instead there will be the kind of plague which the Lord inflicts on any nations that do not go up to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles.
ZEC 14:19 This will be the punishment of Egypt and of all nations that do not go up to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles.
ZEC 14:20 On that day the bells of the horses will bear the inscription “Holy to the Lord.” The cooking pots in the Lord’s temple will be as holy as the bowls in front of the altar.
ZEC 14:21 Every cooking pot in Jerusalem and Judah will become holy in the sight of the Lord who rules over all, so that all who offer sacrifices may come and use some of them to boil their sacrifices in them. On that day there will no longer be a Canaanite in the house of the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 1:1 What follows is divine revelation. The word of the Lord came to Israel through Malachi:
MAL 1:2 “I have shown love to you,” says the Lord, but you say, “How have you shown love to us?” “Esau was Jacob’s brother,” the Lord explains, “yet I chose Jacob
MAL 1:3 and rejected Esau. I turned Esau’s mountains into a deserted wasteland and gave his territory to the wild jackals.”
MAL 1:4 Edom says, “Though we are devastated, we will once again build the ruined places.” So the Lord who rules over all responds, “They indeed may build, but I will overthrow. They will be known as the land of evil, the people with whom the Lord is permanently displeased.
MAL 1:5 Your eyes will see it, and then you will say, ‘May the Lord be magnified even beyond the border of Israel!’”
MAL 1:6 “A son naturally honors his father and a slave respects his master. If I am your father, where is my honor? If I am your master, where is my respect? The Lord who rules over all asks you this, you priests who make light of my name! But you reply, ‘How have we made light of your name?’
MAL 1:7 You are offering improper sacrifices on my altar, yet you ask, ‘How have we offended you?’ By treating the table of the Lord as if it is of no importance!
MAL 1:8 For when you offer blind animals as a sacrifice, is that not wrong? And when you offer the lame and sick, is that not wrong as well? Indeed, try offering them to your governor! Will he be pleased with you or show you favor?” asks the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 1:9 But now plead for God’s favor that he might be gracious to us. “With this kind of offering in your hands, how can he be pleased with you?” asks the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 1:10 “I wish that one of you would close the temple doors, so that you no longer would light useless fires on my altar. I am not pleased with you,” says the Lord who rules over all, “and I will no longer accept an offering from you.
MAL 1:11 For from the east to the west my name will be great among the nations. Incense and pure offerings will be offered in my name everywhere, for my name will be great among the nations,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 1:12 “But you are profaning it by saying that the table of the Lord is common and its offerings despicable.
MAL 1:13 You also say, ‘How tiresome it is.’ You turn up your nose at it,” says the Lord who rules over all, “and instead bring what is stolen, lame, or sick. You bring these things for an offering! Should I accept this from you?” asks the Lord.
MAL 1:14 “There will be harsh condemnation for the hypocrite who has a valuable male animal in his flock but vows and sacrifices something inferior to the Lord. For I am a great king,” says the Lord who rules over all, “and my name is awesome among the nations.”
MAL 2:1 “Now, you priests, this commandment is for you.
MAL 2:2 If you do not listen and take seriously the need to honor my name,” says the Lord who rules over all, “I will send judgment on you and turn your blessings into curses – indeed, I have already done so because you are not taking it to heart.
MAL 2:3 I am about to discipline your children and will spread offal on your faces, the very offal produced at your festivals, and you will be carried away along with it.
MAL 2:4 Then you will know that I sent this commandment to you so that my covenant may continue to be with Levi,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 2:5 “My covenant with him was designed to bring life and peace. I gave its statutes to him to fill him with awe, and he indeed revered me and stood in awe before me.
MAL 2:6 He taught what was true; sinful words were not found on his lips. He walked with me in peace and integrity, and he turned many people away from sin.
MAL 2:7 For the lips of a priest should preserve knowledge of sacred things, and people should seek instruction from him because he is the messenger of the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 2:8 You, however, have turned from the way. You have caused many to violate the law; you have corrupted the covenant with Levi,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 2:9 “Therefore, I have caused you to be ignored and belittled before all people to the extent to which you are not following after me and are showing partiality in your instruction.”
MAL 2:10 Do we not all have one father? Did not one God create us? Why do we betray one another, in this way making light of the covenant of our ancestors?
MAL 2:11 Judah has become disloyal, and unspeakable sins have been committed in Israel and Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the holy things that the Lord loves and has turned to a foreign god!
MAL 2:12 May the Lord cut off from the community of Jacob every last person who does this, as well as the person who presents improper offerings to the Lord who rules over all!
MAL 2:13 You also do this: You cover the altar of the Lord with tears as you weep and groan, because he no longer pays any attention to the offering nor accepts it favorably from you.
MAL 2:14 Yet you ask, “Why?” The Lord is testifying against you on behalf of the wife you married when you were young, to whom you have become unfaithful even though she is your companion and wife by law.
MAL 2:15 No one who has even a small portion of the Spirit in him does this. What did our ancestor do when seeking a child from God? Be attentive, then, to your own spirit, for one should not be disloyal to the wife he took in his youth.
MAL 2:16 “I hate divorce,” says the Lord God of Israel, “and the one who is guilty of violence,” says the Lord who rules over all. “Pay attention to your conscience, and do not be unfaithful.”
MAL 2:17 You have wearied the Lord with your words. But you say, “How have we wearied him?” Because you say, “Everyone who does evil is good in the Lord’s opinion, and he delights in them,” or “Where is the God of justice?”
MAL 3:1 “I am about to send my messenger, who will clear the way before me. Indeed, the Lord you are seeking will suddenly come to his temple, and the messenger of the covenant, whom you long for, is certainly coming,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 3:2 Who can endure the day of his coming? Who can keep standing when he appears? For he will be like a refiner’s fire, like a launderer’s soap.
MAL 3:3 He will act like a refiner and purifier of silver and will cleanse the Levites and refine them like gold and silver. Then they will offer the Lord a proper offering.
MAL 3:4 The offerings of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the Lord as in former times and years past.
MAL 3:5 “I will come to you in judgment. I will be quick to testify against those who practice divination, those who commit adultery, those who break promises, and those who exploit workers, widows, and orphans, who refuse to help the immigrant and in this way show they do not fear me,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 3:6 “Since, I, the Lord, do not go back on my promises, you, sons of Jacob, have not perished.
MAL 3:7 From the days of your ancestors you have ignored my commandments and have not kept them! Return to me, and I will return to you,” says the Lord who rules over all. “But you say, ‘How should we return?’
MAL 3:8 Can a person rob God? You indeed are robbing me, but you say, ‘How are we robbing you?’ In tithes and contributions!
MAL 3:9 You are bound for judgment because you are robbing me – this whole nation is guilty.
MAL 3:10 “Bring the entire tithe into the storehouse so that there may be food in my temple. Test me in this matter,” says the Lord who rules over all, “to see if I will not open for you the windows of heaven and pour out for you a blessing until there is no room for it all.
MAL 3:11 Then I will stop the plague from ruining your crops, and the vine will not lose its fruit before harvest,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 3:12 “All nations will call you happy, for you indeed will live in a delightful land,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 3:13 “You have criticized me sharply,” says the Lord, “but you ask, ‘How have we criticized you?’
MAL 3:14 You have said, ‘It is useless to serve God. How have we been helped by keeping his requirements and going about like mourners before the Lord who rules over all?
MAL 3:15 So now we consider the arrogant to be happy; indeed, those who practice evil are successful. In fact, those who challenge God escape!’”
MAL 3:16 Then those who respected the Lord spoke to one another, and the Lord took notice. A scroll was prepared before him in which were recorded the names of those who respected the Lord and honored his name.
MAL 3:17 “They will belong to me,” says the Lord who rules over all, “in the day when I prepare my own special property. I will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him.
MAL 3:18 Then once more you will see that I make a distinction between the righteous and the wicked, between the one who serves God and the one who does not.
MAL 4:1 “For indeed the day is coming, burning like a furnace, and all the arrogant evildoers will be chaff. The coming day will burn them up,” says the Lord who rules over all. “It will not leave even a root or branch.
MAL 4:2 But for you who respect my name, the sun of vindication will rise with healing wings, and you will skip about like calves released from the stall.
MAL 4:3 You will trample on the wicked, for they will be like ashes under the soles of your feet on the day which I am preparing,” says the Lord who rules over all.
MAL 4:4 “Remember the law of my servant Moses, to whom at Horeb I gave rules and regulations for all Israel to obey.
MAL 4:5 Look, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord arrives.
MAL 4:6 He will encourage fathers and their children to return to me, so that I will not come and strike the earth with judgment.”
MAT 1:1 This is the record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
MAT 1:2 Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers,
MAT 1:3 Judah the father of Perez and Zerah (by Tamar), Perez the father of Hezron, Hezron the father of Ram,
MAT 1:4 Ram the father of Amminadab, Amminadab the father of Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon,
MAT 1:5 Salmon the father of Boaz (by Rahab), Boaz the father of Obed (by Ruth), Obed the father of Jesse,
MAT 1:6 and Jesse the father of David the king. David was the father of Solomon (by the wife of Uriah ),
MAT 1:7 Solomon the father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam the father of Abijah, Abijah the father of Asa,
MAT 1:8 Asa the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, Joram the father of Uzziah,
MAT 1:9 Uzziah the father of Jotham, Jotham the father of Ahaz, Ahaz the father of Hezekiah,
MAT 1:10 Hezekiah the father of Manasseh, Manasseh the father of Amon, Amon the father of Josiah,
MAT 1:11 and Josiah the father of Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time of the deportation to Babylon.
MAT 1:12 After the deportation to Babylon, Jeconiah became the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel,
MAT 1:13 Zerubbabel the father of Abiud, Abiud the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor,
MAT 1:14 Azor the father of Zadok, Zadok the father of Achim, Achim the father of Eliud,
MAT 1:15 Eliud the father of Eleazar, Eleazar the father of Matthan, Matthan the father of Jacob,
MAT 1:16 and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, by whom Jesus was born, who is called Christ.
MAT 1:17 So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David to the deportation to Babylon, fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon to Christ, fourteen generations.
MAT 1:18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ happened this way. While his mother Mary was engaged to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be pregnant through the Holy Spirit.
MAT 1:19 Because Joseph, her husband to be, was a righteous man, and because he did not want to disgrace her, he intended to divorce her privately.
MAT 1:20 When he had contemplated this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife, because the child conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
MAT 1:21 She will give birth to a son and you will name him Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.”
MAT 1:22 This all happened so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet would be fulfilled:
MAT 1:23 “ Look! The virgin will conceive and bear a son, and they will call him Emmanuel,” which means “ God with us.”
MAT 1:24 When Joseph awoke from sleep he did what the angel of the Lord told him. He took his wife,
MAT 1:25 but did not have marital relations with her until she gave birth to a son, whom he named Jesus.
MAT 2:1 After Jesus was born in Bethlehem
MAT 2:2 saying, “Where is the one who is born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.”
MAT 2:3 When King Herod heard this he was alarmed, and all Jerusalem with him.
MAT 2:4 After assembling all the chief priests and experts in the law, he asked them where the Christ was to be born.
MAT 2:5 “In Bethlehem of Judea,” they said, “for it is written this way by the prophet:
MAT 2:6 ‘ And you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are in no way least among the rulers of Judah, for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel.’”
MAT 2:7 Then Herod privately summoned the wise men and determined from them when the star had appeared.
MAT 2:8 He sent them to Bethlehem and said, “Go and look carefully for the child. When you find him, inform me so that I can go and worship him as well.”
MAT 2:9 After listening to the king they left, and once again the star they saw when it rose led them until it stopped above the place where the child was.
MAT 2:10 When they saw the star they shouted joyfully.
MAT 2:11 As they came into the house and saw the child with Mary his mother, they bowed down and worshiped him. They opened their treasure boxes and gave him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
MAT 2:12 After being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they went back by another route to their own country.
MAT 2:13 After they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said, “Get up, take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to look for the child to kill him.”
MAT 2:14 Then he got up, took the child and his mother during the night, and went to Egypt.
MAT 2:15 He stayed there until Herod died. In this way what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet was fulfilled : “I called my Son out of Egypt.”
MAT 2:16 When Herod saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, he became enraged. He sent men to kill all the children in Bethlehem and throughout the surrounding region from the age of two and under, according to the time he had learned from the wise men.
MAT 2:17 Then what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled:
MAT 2:18 “ A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and loud wailing, Rachel weeping for her children, and she did not want to be comforted, because they were gone.”
MAT 2:19 After Herod had died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
MAT 2:20 saying, “Get up, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the child’s life are dead.”
MAT 2:21 So he got up and took the child and his mother and returned to the land of Israel.
MAT 2:22 But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. After being warned in a dream, he went to the regions of Galilee.
MAT 2:23 He came to a town called Nazareth and lived there. Then what had been spoken by the prophets was fulfilled, that Jesus would be called a Nazarene.
MAT 3:1 In those days John the Baptist came into the wilderness of Judea proclaiming,
MAT 3:2 “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near.”
MAT 3:3 For he is the one about whom Isaiah the prophet had spoken: “ The voice of one shouting in the wilderness, ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord, make his paths straight.’”
MAT 3:4 Now John wore clothing made from camel’s hair with a leather belt around his waist, and his diet consisted of locusts and wild honey.
MAT 3:5 Then people from Jerusalem, as well as all Judea and all the region around the Jordan, were going out to him,
MAT 3:6 and he was baptizing them in the Jordan River as they confessed their sins.
MAT 3:7 But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “You offspring of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
MAT 3:8 Therefore produce fruit that proves your repentance,
MAT 3:9 and don’t think you can say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that God can raise up children for Abraham from these stones!
MAT 3:10 Even now the ax is laid at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.
MAT 3:11 “I baptize you with water, for repentance, but the one coming after me is more powerful than I am – I am not worthy to carry his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
MAT 3:12 His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clean out his threshing floor and will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with inextinguishable fire.”
MAT 3:13 Then Jesus came from Galilee to John to be baptized by him in the Jordan River.
MAT 3:14 But John tried to prevent him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and yet you come to me?”
MAT 3:15 So Jesus replied to him, “Let it happen now, for it is right for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then John yielded to him.
MAT 3:16 After Jesus was baptized, just as he was coming up out of the water, the heavens opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming on him.
MAT 3:17 And a voice from heaven said, “This is my one dear Son; in him I take great delight.”
MAT 4:1 Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
MAT 4:2 After he fasted forty days and forty nights he was famished.
MAT 4:3 The tempter came and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command these stones to become bread.”
MAT 4:4 But he answered, “It is written, ‘ Man does not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God*.’”
MAT 4:5 Then the devil took him to the holy city, had him stand on the highest point of the temple,
MAT 4:6 and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down. For it is written, ‘ He will command his angels concerning you’ and ‘ with their hands they will lift you up, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.’”
MAT 4:7 Jesus said to him, “Once again it is written: ‘ You are not to put the Lord your God to the test.’”
MAT 4:8 Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their grandeur.
MAT 4:9 And he said to him, “I will give you all these things if you throw yourself to the ground and worship me.”
MAT 4:10 Then Jesus said to him, “Go away, Satan! For it is written: ‘ You are to worship the Lord your God and serve only him.’”
MAT 4:11 Then the devil left him, and angels came and began ministering to his needs.
MAT 4:12 Now when Jesus heard that John had been imprisoned, he went into Galilee.
MAT 4:13 While in Galilee, he moved from Nazareth by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
MAT 4:14 so that what was spoken by Isaiah the prophet would be fulfilled:
MAT 4:15 “ Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, the way by the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles –
MAT 4:16 the people who sit in darkness have seen a great light, and on those who sit in the region and shadow of death a light has dawned.”
MAT 4:17 From that time Jesus began to preach this message: “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near.”
MAT 4:18 As he was walking by the Sea of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon (called Peter) and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were fishermen).
MAT 4:19 He said to them, “Follow me, and I will turn you into fishers of people.”
MAT 4:20 They left their nets immediately and followed him.
MAT 4:21 Going on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in a boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. Then he called them.
MAT 4:22 They immediately left the boat and their father and followed him.
MAT 4:23 Jesus went throughout all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all kinds of disease and sickness among the people.
MAT 4:24 So a report about him spread throughout Syria. People brought to him all who suffered with various illnesses and afflictions, those who had seizures, paralytics, and those possessed by demons, and he healed them.
MAT 4:25 And large crowds followed him from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and beyond the Jordan River.
MAT 5:1 When he saw the crowds, he went up the mountain. After he sat down his disciples came to him.
MAT 5:2 Then he began to teach them by saying:
MAT 5:3 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to them.
MAT 5:4 “Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
MAT 5:5 “Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
MAT 5:6 “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be satisfied.
MAT 5:7 “Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
MAT 5:8 “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
MAT 5:9 “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called the children of God.
MAT 5:10 “Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to them.
MAT 5:11 “Blessed are you when people insult you and persecute you and say all kinds of evil things about you falsely on account of me.
MAT 5:12 Rejoice and be glad because your reward is great in heaven, for they persecuted the prophets before you in the same way.
MAT 5:13 “You are the salt of the earth. But if salt loses its flavor, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled on by people.
MAT 5:14 You are the light of the world. A city located on a hill cannot be hidden.
MAT 5:15 People do not light a lamp and put it under a basket but on a lampstand, and it gives light to all in the house.
MAT 5:16 In the same way, let your light shine before people, so that they can see your good deeds and give honor to your Father in heaven.
MAT 5:17 “Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets. I have not come to abolish these things but to fulfill them.
MAT 5:18 I tell you the truth, until heaven and earth pass away not the smallest letter or stroke of a letter will pass from the law until everything takes place.
MAT 5:19 So anyone who breaks one of the least of these commands and teaches others to do so will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever obeys them and teaches others to do so will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 5:20 For I tell you, unless your righteousness goes beyond that of the experts in the law and the Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 5:21 “You have heard that it was said to an older generation, ‘ Do not murder,’ and ‘whoever murders will be subjected to judgment.’
MAT 5:22 But I say to you that anyone who is angry with a brother will be subjected to judgment. And whoever insults a brother will be brought before the council, and whoever says ‘Fool’ will be sent to fiery hell.
MAT 5:23 So then, if you bring your gift to the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you,
MAT 5:24 leave your gift there in front of the altar. First go and be reconciled to your brother and then come and present your gift.
MAT 5:25 Reach agreement quickly with your accuser while on the way to court, or he may hand you over to the judge, and the judge hand you over to the warden, and you will be thrown into prison.
MAT 5:26 I tell you the truth, you will never get out of there until you have paid the last penny!
MAT 5:27 “You have heard that it was said, ‘ Do not commit adultery.’
MAT 5:28 But I say to you that whoever looks at a woman to desire her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
MAT 5:29 If your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away! It is better to lose one of your members than to have your whole body thrown into hell.
MAT 5:30 If your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away! It is better to lose one of your members than to have your whole body go into hell.
MAT 5:31 “It was said, ‘ Whoever divorces his wife must give her a legal document.’
MAT 5:32 But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife, except for immorality, makes her commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
MAT 5:33 “Again, you have heard that it was said to an older generation, ‘ Do not break an oath, but fulfill your vows to the Lord break an oath, but fulfill your vows to the Lord.’
MAT 5:34 But I say to you, do not take oaths at all – not by heaven, because it is the throne of God,
MAT 5:35 not by earth, because it is his footstool, and not by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
MAT 5:36 Do not take an oath by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black.
MAT 5:37 Let your word be ‘Yes, yes’ or ‘No, no.’ More than this is from the evil one.
MAT 5:38 “You have heard that it was said, ‘ An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’
MAT 5:39 But I say to you, do not resist the evildoer. But whoever strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other to him as well.
MAT 5:40 And if someone wants to sue you and to take your tunic, give him your coat also.
MAT 5:41 And if anyone forces you to go one mile, go with him two.
MAT 5:42 Give to the one who asks you, and do not reject the one who wants to borrow from you.
MAT 5:43 “You have heard that it was said, ‘ Love your neighbor’ and ‘hate your enemy.’
MAT 5:44 But I say to you, love your enemy and pray for those who persecute you,
MAT 5:45 so that you may be like your Father in heaven, since he causes the sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
MAT 5:46 For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Even the tax collectors do the same, don’t they?
MAT 5:47 And if you only greet your brothers, what more do you do? Even the Gentiles do the same, don’t they?
MAT 5:48 So then, be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
MAT 6:1 “Be careful not to display your righteousness merely to be seen by people. Otherwise you have no reward with your Father in heaven.
MAT 6:2 Thus whenever you do charitable giving, do not blow a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in synagogues and on streets so that people will praise them. I tell you the truth, they have their reward.
MAT 6:3 But when you do your giving, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
MAT 6:4 so that your gift may be in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.
MAT 6:5 “Whenever you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, because they love to pray while standing in synagogues and on street corners so that people can see them. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
MAT 6:6 But whenever you pray, go into your room, close the door, and pray to your Father in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.
MAT 6:7 When you pray, do not babble repetitiously like the Gentiles, because they think that by their many words they will be heard.
MAT 6:8 Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him.
MAT 6:9 So pray this way: Our Father in heaven, may your name be honored,
MAT 6:10 may your kingdom come, may your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
MAT 6:11 Give us today our daily bread,
MAT 6:12 and forgive us our debts, as we ourselves have forgiven our debtors.
MAT 6:13 And do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.
MAT 6:14 “For if you forgive others their sins, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
MAT 6:15 But if you do not forgive others, your Father will not forgive you your sins.
MAT 6:16 “When you fast, do not look sullen like the hypocrites, for they make their faces unattractive so that people will see them fasting. I tell you the truth, they have their reward.
MAT 6:17 When you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face,
MAT 6:18 so that it will not be obvious to others when you are fasting, but only to your Father who is in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.
MAT 6:19 “Do not accumulate for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal.
MAT 6:20 But accumulate for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy, and thieves do not break in and steal.
MAT 6:21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
MAT 6:22 “The eye is the lamp of the body. If then your eye is healthy, your whole body will be full of light.
MAT 6:23 But if your eye is diseased, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!
MAT 6:24 “No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.
MAT 6:25 “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or drink, or about your body, what you will wear. Isn’t there more to life than food and more to the body than clothing?
MAT 6:26 Look at the birds in the sky: They do not sow, or reap, or gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren’t you more valuable than they are?
MAT 6:27 And which of you by worrying can add even one hour to his life?
MAT 6:28 Why do you worry about clothing? Think about how the flowers of the field grow; they do not work or spin.
MAT 6:29 Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these!
MAT 6:30 And if this is how God clothes the wild grass, which is here today and tomorrow is tossed into the fire to heat the oven, won’t he clothe you even more, you people of little faith?
MAT 6:31 So then, don’t worry saying, ‘What will we eat?’ or ‘What will we drink?’ or ‘What will we wear?’
MAT 6:32 For the unconverted pursue these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them.
MAT 6:33 But above all pursue his kingdom and righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well.
MAT 6:34 So then, do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Today has enough trouble of its own.
MAT 7:1 “Do not judge so that you will not be judged.
MAT 7:2 For by the standard you judge you will be judged, and the measure you use will be the measure you receive.
MAT 7:3 Why do you see the speck in your brother’s eye, but fail to see the beam of wood in your own?
MAT 7:4 Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Let me remove the speck from your eye,’ while there is a beam in your own?
MAT 7:5 You hypocrite! First remove the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
MAT 7:6 Do not give what is holy to dogs or throw your pearls before pigs; otherwise they will trample them under their feet and turn around and tear you to pieces.
MAT 7:7 “Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened for you.
MAT 7:8 For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
MAT 7:9 Is there anyone among you who, if his son asks for bread, will give him a stone?
MAT 7:10 Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a snake?
MAT 7:11 If you then, although you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!
MAT 7:12 In everything, treat others as you would want them to treat you, for this fulfills the law and the prophets.
MAT 7:13 “Enter through the narrow gate, because the gate is wide and the way is spacious that leads to destruction, and there are many who enter through it.
MAT 7:14 But the gate is narrow and the way is difficult that leads to life, and there are few who find it.
MAT 7:15 “Watch out for false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing but inwardly are voracious wolves.
MAT 7:16 You will recognize them by their fruit. Grapes are not gathered from thorns or figs from thistles, are they?
MAT 7:17 In the same way, every good tree bears good fruit, but the bad tree bears bad fruit.
MAT 7:18 A good tree is not able to bear bad fruit, nor a bad tree to bear good fruit.
MAT 7:19 Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
MAT 7:20 So then, you will recognize them by their fruit.
MAT 7:21 “Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of heaven – only the one who does the will of my Father in heaven.
MAT 7:22 On that day, many will say to me, ‘Lord, Lord, didn’t we prophesy in your name, and in your name cast out demons and do many powerful deeds?’
MAT 7:23 Then I will declare to them, ‘I never knew you. Go away from me, you lawbreakers!’
MAT 7:24 “Everyone who hears these words of mine and does them is like a wise man who built his house on rock.
MAT 7:25 The rain fell, the flood came, and the winds beat against that house, but it did not collapse because it had been founded on rock.
MAT 7:26 Everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them is like a foolish man who built his house on sand.
MAT 7:27 The rain fell, the flood came, and the winds beat against that house, and it collapsed; it was utterly destroyed!”
MAT 7:28 When Jesus finished saying these things, the crowds were amazed by his teaching,
MAT 7:29 because he taught them like one who had authority, not like their experts in the law.
MAT 8:1 After he came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him.
MAT 8:2 And a leper approached, and bowed low before him, saying, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
MAT 8:3 He stretched out his hand and touched him saying, “I am willing. Be clean!” Immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
MAT 8:4 Then Jesus said to him, “See that you do not speak to anyone, but go, show yourself to a priest, and bring the offering that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
MAT 8:5 When he entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him asking for help:
MAT 8:6 “Lord, my servant is lying at home paralyzed, in terrible anguish.”
MAT 8:7 Jesus said to him, “I will come and heal him.”
MAT 8:8 But the centurion replied, “Lord, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof. Instead, just say the word and my servant will be healed.
MAT 8:9 For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I say to this one, ‘Go’ and he goes, and to another ‘Come’ and he comes, and to my slave ‘Do this’ and he does it.”
MAT 8:10 When Jesus heard this he was amazed and said to those who followed him, “I tell you the truth, I have not found such faith in anyone in Israel!
MAT 8:11 I tell you, many will come from the east and west to share the banquet with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven,
MAT 8:12 but the sons of the kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
MAT 8:13 Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go; just as you believed, it will be done for you.” And the servant was healed at that hour.
MAT 8:14 Now when Jesus entered Peter’s house, he saw his mother-in-law lying down, sick with a fever.
MAT 8:15 He touched her hand, and the fever left her. Then she got up and began to serve them.
MAT 8:16 When it was evening, many demon-possessed people were brought to him. He drove out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick.
MAT 8:17 In this way what was spoken by Isaiah the prophet was fulfilled: “ He took our weaknesses and carried our diseases.”
MAT 8:18 Now when Jesus saw a large crowd around him, he gave orders to go to the other side of the lake.
MAT 8:19 Then an expert in the law came to him and said, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.”
MAT 8:20 Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens, and the birds in the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”
MAT 8:21 Another of the disciples said to him, “Lord, let me first go and bury my father.”
MAT 8:22 But Jesus said to him, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.”
MAT 8:23 As he got into the boat, his disciples followed him.
MAT 8:24 And a great storm developed on the sea so that the waves began to swamp the boat. But he was asleep.
MAT 8:25 So they came and woke him up saying, “Lord, save us! We are about to die!”
MAT 8:26 But he said to them, “Why are you cowardly, you people of little faith?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the sea, and it was dead calm.
MAT 8:27 And the men were amazed and said, “What sort of person is this? Even the winds and the sea obey him!”
MAT 8:28 When he came to the other side, to the region of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs met him. They were extremely violent, so that no one was able to pass by that way.
MAT 8:29 They cried out, “Son of God, leave us alone! Have you come here to torment us before the time?”
MAT 8:30 A large herd of pigs was feeding some distance from them.
MAT 8:31 Then the demons begged him, “If you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.”
MAT 8:32 And he said, “Go!” So they came out and went into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake and drowned in the water.
MAT 8:33 The herdsmen ran off, went into the town, and told everything that had happened to the demon-possessed men.
MAT 8:34 Then the entire town came out to meet Jesus. And when they saw him, they begged him to leave their region.
MAT 9:1 After getting into a boat he crossed to the other side and came to his own town.
MAT 9:2 Just then some people brought to him a paralytic lying on a stretcher. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Have courage, son! Your sins are forgiven.”
MAT 9:3 Then some of the experts in the law said to themselves, “This man is blaspheming!”
MAT 9:4 When Jesus saw their reaction he said, “Why do you respond with evil in your hearts?
MAT 9:5 Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven’ or to say, ‘Stand up and walk’?
MAT 9:6 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins” – then he said to the paralytic – “Stand up, take your stretcher, and go home.”
MAT 9:7 And he stood up and went home.
MAT 9:8 When the crowd saw this, they were afraid and honored God who had given such authority to men.
MAT 9:9 As Jesus went on from there, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax booth. “Follow me,” he said to him. And he got up and followed him.
MAT 9:10 As Jesus was having a meal in Matthew’s house, many tax collectors and sinners came and ate with Jesus and his disciples.
MAT 9:11 When the Pharisees saw this they said to his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
MAT 9:12 When Jesus heard this he said, “Those who are healthy don’t need a physician, but those who are sick do.
MAT 9:13 Go and learn what this saying means: ‘ I want mercy and not sacrifice.’ For I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
MAT 9:14 Then John’s disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don’t fast?”
MAT 9:15 Jesus said to them, “The wedding guests cannot mourn while the bridegroom is with them, can they? But the days are coming when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and then they will fast.
MAT 9:16 No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, because the patch will pull away from the garment and the tear will be worse.
MAT 9:17 And no one pours new wine into old wineskins; otherwise the skins burst and the wine is spilled out and the skins are destroyed. Instead they put new wine into new wineskins and both are preserved.”
MAT 9:18 As he was saying these things, a ruler came, bowed low before him, and said, “My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her and she will live.”
MAT 9:19 Jesus and his disciples got up and followed him.
MAT 9:20 But a woman who had been suffering from a hemorrhage for twelve years came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak.
MAT 9:21 For she kept saying to herself, “If only I touch his cloak, I will be healed.”
MAT 9:22 But when Jesus turned and saw her he said, “Have courage, daughter! Your faith has made you well.” And the woman was healed from that hour.
MAT 9:23 When Jesus entered the ruler’s house and saw the flute players and the disorderly crowd,
MAT 9:24 he said, “Go away, for the girl is not dead but asleep.” And they began making fun of him.
MAT 9:25 But when the crowd had been put outside, he went in and gently took her by the hand, and the girl got up.
MAT 9:26 And the news of this spread throughout that region.
MAT 9:27 As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, shouting, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
MAT 9:28 When he went into the house, the blind men came to him. Jesus said to them, “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” They said to him, “Yes, Lord.”
MAT 9:29 Then he touched their eyes saying, “Let it be done for you according to your faith.”
MAT 9:30 And their eyes were opened. Then Jesus sternly warned them, “See that no one knows about this.”
MAT 9:31 But they went out and spread the news about him throughout that entire region.
MAT 9:32 As they were going away, a man who could not talk and was demon-possessed was brought to him.
MAT 9:33 After the demon was cast out, the man who had been mute spoke. The crowds were amazed and said, “Never has anything like this been seen in Israel!”
MAT 9:34 But the Pharisees said, “By the ruler of demons he casts out demons.”
MAT 9:35 Then Jesus went throughout all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every kind of disease and sickness.
MAT 9:36 When he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them because they were bewildered and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
MAT 9:37 Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few.
MAT 9:38 Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”
MAT 10:1 Jesus called his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits so they could cast them out and heal every kind of disease and sickness.
MAT 10:2 Now these are the names of the twelve apostles: first, Simon (called Peter), and Andrew his brother; James son of Zebedee and John his brother;
MAT 10:3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
MAT 10:4 Simon the Zealot and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
MAT 10:5 Jesus sent out these twelve, instructing them as follows: “Do not go to Gentile regions and do not enter any Samaritan town.
MAT 10:6 Go instead to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
MAT 10:7 As you go, preach this message: ‘The kingdom of heaven is near!’
MAT 10:8 Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons. Freely you received, freely give.
MAT 10:9 Do not take gold, silver, or copper in your belts,
MAT 10:10 no bag for the journey, or an extra tunic, or sandals or staff, for the worker deserves his provisions.
MAT 10:11 Whenever you enter a town or village, find out who is worthy there and stay with them until you leave.
MAT 10:12 As you enter the house, give it greetings.
MAT 10:13 And if the house is worthy, let your peace come on it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
MAT 10:14 And if anyone will not welcome you or listen to your message, shake the dust off your feet as you leave that house or that town.
MAT 10:15 I tell you the truth, it will be more bearable for the region of Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town!
MAT 10:16 “I am sending you out like sheep surrounded by wolves, so be wise as serpents and innocent as doves.
MAT 10:17 Beware of people, because they will hand you over to councils and flog you in their synagogues.
MAT 10:18 And you will be brought before governors and kings because of me, as a witness to them and the Gentiles.
MAT 10:19 Whenever they hand you over for trial, do not worry about how to speak or what to say, for what you should say will be given to you at that time.
MAT 10:20 For it is not you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
MAT 10:21 “Brother will hand over brother to death, and a father his child. Children will rise against parents and have them put to death.
MAT 10:22 And you will be hated by everyone because of my name. But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
MAT 10:23 Whenever they persecute you in one place, flee to another. I tell you the truth, you will not finish going through all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
MAT 10:24 “A disciple is not greater than his teacher, nor a slave greater than his master.
MAT 10:25 It is enough for the disciple to become like his teacher, and the slave like his master. If they have called the head of the house ‘Beelzebul,’ how much more will they defame the members of his household!
MAT 10:26 “Do not be afraid of them, for nothing is hidden that will not be revealed, and nothing is secret that will not be made known.
MAT 10:27 What I say to you in the dark, tell in the light, and what is whispered in your ear, proclaim from the housetops.
MAT 10:28 Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Instead, fear the one who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
MAT 10:29 Aren’t two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them falls to the ground apart from your Father’s will.
MAT 10:30 Even all the hairs on your head are numbered.
MAT 10:31 So do not be afraid; you are more valuable than many sparrows.
MAT 10:32 “Whoever, then, acknowledges me before people, I will acknowledge before my Father in heaven.
MAT 10:33 But whoever denies me before people, I will deny him also before my Father in heaven.
MAT 10:34 “Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have not come to bring peace but a sword.
MAT 10:35 For I have come to set a man against his father, a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law,
MAT 10:36 and a man’s enemies will be the members of his household.
MAT 10:37 “Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
MAT 10:38 And whoever does not take up his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
MAT 10:39 Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life because of me will find it.
MAT 10:40 “Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.
MAT 10:41 Whoever receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward. Whoever receives a righteous person in the name of a righteous person will receive a righteous person’s reward.
MAT 10:42 And whoever gives only a cup of cold water to one of these little ones in the name of a disciple, I tell you the truth, he will never lose his reward.”
MAT 11:1 When Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in their towns.
MAT 11:2 Now when John heard in prison about the deeds Christ had done, he sent his disciples to ask a question:
MAT 11:3 “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?”
MAT 11:4 Jesus answered them, “Go tell John what you hear and see:
MAT 11:5 The blind see, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have good news proclaimed to them.
MAT 11:6 Blessed is anyone who takes no offense at me.”
MAT 11:7 While they were going away, Jesus began to speak to the crowd about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
MAT 11:8 What did you go out to see? A man dressed in fancy clothes? Look, those who wear fancy clothes are in the homes of kings!
MAT 11:9 What did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
MAT 11:10 This is the one about whom it is written: ‘ Look, I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
MAT 11:11 “I tell you the truth, among those born of women, no one has arisen greater than John the Baptist. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he is.
MAT 11:12 From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and forceful people lay hold of it.
MAT 11:13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John appeared.
MAT 11:14 And if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah, who is to come.
MAT 11:15 The one who has ears had better listen!
MAT 11:16 “To what should I compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the marketplaces who call out to one another,
MAT 11:17 ‘We played the flute for you, yet you did not dance; we wailed in mourning, yet you did not weep.’
MAT 11:18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon!’
MAT 11:19 The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at him, a glutton and a drunk, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ But wisdom is vindicated by her deeds.”
MAT 11:20 Then Jesus began to criticize openly the cities in which he had done many of his miracles, because they did not repent.
MAT 11:21 “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! If the miracles done in you had been done in Tyre they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
MAT 11:22 But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you!
MAT 11:23 And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? No, you will be thrown down to Hades! For if the miracles done among you had been done in Sodom, it would have continued to this day.
MAT 11:24 But I tell you, it will be more bearable for the region of Sodom on the day of judgment than for you!”
MAT 11:25 At that time Jesus said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to little children.
MAT 11:26 Yes, Father, for this was your gracious will.
MAT 11:27 All things have been handed over to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son decides to reveal him.
MAT 11:28 Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.
MAT 11:29 Take my yoke on you and learn from me, because I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
MAT 11:30 For my yoke is easy to bear, and my load is not hard to carry.”
MAT 12:1 At that time Jesus went through the grain fields on a Sabbath. His disciples were hungry, and they began to pick heads of wheat and eat them.
MAT 12:2 But when the Pharisees saw this they said to him, “Look, your disciples are doing what is against the law to do on the Sabbath.”
MAT 12:3 He said to them, “Haven’t you read what David did when he and his companions were hungry –
MAT 12:4 how he entered the house of God and they ate the sacred bread, which was against the law for him or his companions to eat, but only for the priests?
MAT 12:5 Or have you not read in the law that the priests in the temple desecrate the Sabbath and yet are not guilty?
MAT 12:6 I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
MAT 12:7 If you had known what this means: ‘ I want mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the innocent.
MAT 12:8 For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.”
MAT 12:9 Then Jesus left that place and entered their synagogue.
MAT 12:10 A man was there who had a withered hand. And they asked Jesus, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?” so that they could accuse him.
MAT 12:11 He said to them, “Would not any one of you, if he had one sheep that fell into a pit on the Sabbath, take hold of it and lift it out?
MAT 12:12 How much more valuable is a person than a sheep! So it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”
MAT 12:13 Then he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out and it was restored, as healthy as the other.
MAT 12:14 But the Pharisees went out and plotted against him, as to how they could assassinate him.
MAT 12:15 Now when Jesus learned of this, he went away from there. Great crowds followed him, and he healed them all.
MAT 12:16 But he sternly warned them not to make him known.
MAT 12:17 This fulfilled what was spoken by Isaiah the prophet:
MAT 12:18 “ Here is my servant whom I have chosen, the one I love, in whom I take great delight. I will put my Spirit on him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations.
MAT 12:19 He will not quarrel or cry out, nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets.
MAT 12:20 He will not break a bruised reed or extinguish a smoldering wick, until he brings justice to victory.
MAT 12:21 And in his name the Gentiles will hope.”
MAT 12:22 Then they brought to him a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute. Jesus healed him so that he could speak and see.
MAT 12:23 All the crowds were amazed and said, “Could this one be the Son of David?”
MAT 12:24 But when the Pharisees heard this they said, “He does not cast out demons except by the power of Beelzebul, the ruler of demons!”
MAT 12:25 Now when Jesus realized what they were thinking, he said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is destroyed, and no town or house divided against itself will stand.
MAT 12:26 So if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
MAT 12:27 And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? For this reason they will be your judges.
MAT 12:28 But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has already overtaken you.
MAT 12:29 How else can someone enter a strong man’s house and steal his property, unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can thoroughly plunder the house.
MAT 12:30 Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
MAT 12:31 For this reason I tell you, people will be forgiven for every sin and blasphemy, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
MAT 12:32 Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven. But whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come.
MAT 12:33 “Make a tree good and its fruit will be good, or make a tree bad and its fruit will be bad, for a tree is known by its fruit.
MAT 12:34 Offspring of vipers! How are you able to say anything good, since you are evil? For the mouth speaks from what fills the heart.
MAT 12:35 The good person brings good things out of his good treasury, and the evil person brings evil things out of his evil treasury.
MAT 12:36 I tell you that on the day of judgment, people will give an account for every worthless word they speak.
MAT 12:37 For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”
MAT 12:38 Then some of the experts in the law along with some Pharisees answered him, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
MAT 12:39 But he answered them, “An evil and adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
MAT 12:40 For just as Jonah was in the belly of the huge fish for three days and three nights, so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights.
MAT 12:41 The people of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they repented when Jonah preached to them – and now, something greater than Jonah is here!
MAT 12:42 The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon – and now, something greater than Solomon is here!
MAT 12:43 “When an unclean spirit goes out of a person, it passes through waterless places looking for rest but does not find it.
MAT 12:44 Then it says, ‘I will return to the home I left.’ When it returns, it finds the house empty, swept clean, and put in order.
MAT 12:45 Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go in and live there, so the last state of that person is worse than the first. It will be that way for this evil generation as well!”
MAT 12:46 While Jesus was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers came and stood outside, asking to speak to him.
MAT 12:47 Someone told him, “Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside wanting to speak to you.”
MAT 12:48 To the one who had said this, Jesus replied, “Who is my mother and who are my brothers?”
MAT 12:49 And pointing toward his disciples he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers!
MAT 12:50 For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
MAT 13:1 On that day after Jesus went out of the house, he sat by the lake.
MAT 13:2 And such a large crowd gathered around him that he got into a boat to sit while the whole crowd stood on the shore.
MAT 13:3 He told them many things in parables, saying: “Listen! A sower went out to sow.
MAT 13:4 And as he sowed, some seeds fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured them.
MAT 13:5 Other seeds fell on rocky ground where they did not have much soil. They sprang up quickly because the soil was not deep.
MAT 13:6 But when the sun came up, they were scorched, and because they did not have sufficient root, they withered.
MAT 13:7 Other seeds fell among the thorns, and they grew up and choked them.
MAT 13:8 But other seeds fell on good soil and produced grain, some a hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.
MAT 13:9 The one who has ears had better listen!”
MAT 13:10 Then the disciples came to him and said, “Why do you speak to them in parables?”
MAT 13:11 He replied, “You have been given the opportunity to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but they have not.
MAT 13:12 For whoever has will be given more, and will have an abundance. But whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.
MAT 13:13 For this reason I speak to them in parables: Although they see they do not see, and although they hear they do not hear nor do they understand.
MAT 13:14 And concerning them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says: ‘ You will listen carefully yet will never understand, you will look closely yet will never comprehend.
MAT 13:15 For the heart of this people has become dull; they are hard of hearing, and they have shut their eyes, so that they would not see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their hearts and turn, and I would heal them.’
MAT 13:16 “But your eyes are blessed because they see, and your ears because they hear.
MAT 13:17 For I tell you the truth, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.
MAT 13:18 “So listen to the parable of the sower:
MAT 13:19 When anyone hears the word about the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches what was sown in his heart; this is the seed sown along the path.
MAT 13:20 The seed sown on rocky ground is the person who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy.
MAT 13:21 But he has no root in himself and does not endure; when trouble or persecution comes because of the word, immediately he falls away.
MAT 13:22 The seed sown among thorns is the person who hears the word, but worldly cares and the seductiveness of wealth choke the word, so it produces nothing.
MAT 13:23 But as for the seed sown on good soil, this is the person who hears the word and understands. He bears fruit, yielding a hundred, sixty, or thirty times what was sown.”
MAT 13:24 He presented them with another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a person who sowed good seed in his field.
MAT 13:25 But while everyone was sleeping, an enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat and went away.
MAT 13:26 When the plants sprouted and bore grain, then the weeds also appeared.
MAT 13:27 So the slaves of the owner came and said to him, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Then where did the weeds come from?’
MAT 13:28 He said, ‘An enemy has done this.’ So the slaves replied, ‘Do you want us to go and gather them?’
MAT 13:29 But he said, ‘No, since in gathering the weeds you may uproot the wheat with them.
MAT 13:30 Let both grow together until the harvest. At harvest time I will tell the reapers, “First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned, but then gather the wheat into my barn.”’”
MAT 13:31 He gave them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field.
MAT 13:32 It is the smallest of all the seeds, but when it has grown it is the greatest garden plant and becomes a tree, so that the wild birds come and nest in its branches.”
MAT 13:33 He told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and mixed with three measures of flour until all the dough had risen.”
MAT 13:34 Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the crowds; he did not speak to them without a parable.
MAT 13:35 This fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet: “ I will open my mouth in parables, I will announce what has been hidden from the foundation of the world.”
MAT 13:36 Then he left the crowds and went into the house. And his disciples came to him saying, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
MAT 13:37 He answered, “The one who sowed the good seed is the Son of Man.
MAT 13:38 The field is the world and the good seed are the people of the kingdom. The weeds are the people of the evil one,
MAT 13:39 and the enemy who sows them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.
MAT 13:40 As the weeds are collected and burned with fire, so it will be at the end of the age.
MAT 13:41 The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather from his kingdom everything that causes sin as well as all lawbreakers.
MAT 13:42 They will throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
MAT 13:43 Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. The one who has ears had better listen!
MAT 13:44 “The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure, hidden in a field, that a person found and hid. Then because of joy he went and sold all that he had and bought that field.
MAT 13:45 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant searching for fine pearls.
MAT 13:46 When he found a pearl of great value, he went out and sold everything he had and bought it.
MAT 13:47 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was cast into the sea that caught all kinds of fish.
MAT 13:48 When it was full, they pulled it ashore, sat down, and put the good fish into containers and threw the bad away.
MAT 13:49 It will be this way at the end of the age. Angels will come and separate the evil from the righteous
MAT 13:50 and throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
MAT 13:51 “Have you understood all these things?” They replied, “Yes.”
MAT 13:52 Then he said to them, “Therefore every expert in the law who has been trained for the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his treasure what is new and old.”
MAT 13:53 Now when Jesus finished these parables, he moved on from there.
MAT 13:54 Then he came to his hometown and began to teach the people in their synagogue. They were astonished and said, “Where did this man get such wisdom and miraculous powers?
MAT 13:55 Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother named Mary? And aren’t his brothers James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas?
MAT 13:56 And aren’t all his sisters here with us? Where did he get all this?”
MAT 13:57 And so they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and in his own house.”
MAT 13:58 And he did not do many miracles there because of their unbelief.
MAT 14:1 At that time Herod the tetrarch heard reports about Jesus,
MAT 14:2 and he said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead! And because of this, miraculous powers are at work in him.”
MAT 14:3 For Herod had arrested John, bound him, and put him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife,
MAT 14:4 because John had repeatedly told him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
MAT 14:5 Although Herod wanted to kill John, he feared the crowd because they accepted John as a prophet.
MAT 14:6 But on Herod’s birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced before them and pleased Herod,
MAT 14:7 so much that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
MAT 14:8 Instructed by her mother, she said, “Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a platter.”
MAT 14:9 Although it grieved the king, because of his oath and the dinner guests he commanded it to be given.
MAT 14:10 So he sent and had John beheaded in the prison.
MAT 14:11 His head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
MAT 14:12 Then John’s disciples came and took the body and buried it and went and told Jesus.
MAT 14:13 Now when Jesus heard this he went away from there privately in a boat to an isolated place. But when the crowd heard about it, they followed him on foot from the towns.
MAT 14:14 As he got out he saw the large crowd, and he had compassion on them and healed their sick.
MAT 14:15 When evening arrived, his disciples came to him saying, “This is an isolated place and the hour is already late. Send the crowds away so that they can go into the villages and buy food for themselves.”
MAT 14:16 But he replied, “They don’t need to go. You give them something to eat.”
MAT 14:17 They said to him, “We have here only five loaves and two fish.”
MAT 14:18 “Bring them here to me,” he replied.
MAT 14:19 Then he instructed the crowds to sit down on the grass. He took the five loaves and two fish, and looking up to heaven he gave thanks and broke the loaves. He gave them to the disciples, who in turn gave them to the crowds.
MAT 14:20 They all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, twelve baskets full.
MAT 14:21 Not counting women and children, there were about five thousand men who ate.
MAT 14:22 Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side, while he dispersed the crowds.
MAT 14:23 And after he sent the crowds away, he went up the mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone.
MAT 14:24 Meanwhile the boat, already far from land, was taking a beating from the waves because the wind was against it.
MAT 14:25 As the night was ending, Jesus came to them walking on the sea.
MAT 14:26 When the disciples saw him walking on the water they were terrified and said, “It’s a ghost!” and cried out with fear.
MAT 14:27 But immediately Jesus spoke to them: “Have courage! It is I. Do not be afraid.”
MAT 14:28 Peter said to him, “Lord, if it is you, order me to come to you on the water.”
MAT 14:29 So he said, “Come.” Peter got out of the boat, walked on the water, and came toward Jesus.
MAT 14:30 But when he saw the strong wind he became afraid. And starting to sink, he cried out, “Lord, save me!”
MAT 14:31 Immediately Jesus reached out his hand and caught him, saying to him, “You of little faith, why did you doubt?”
MAT 14:32 When they went up into the boat, the wind ceased.
MAT 14:33 Then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.”
MAT 14:34 After they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret.
MAT 14:35 When the people there recognized him, they sent word into all the surrounding area, and they brought all their sick to him.
MAT 14:36 They begged him if they could only touch the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed.
MAT 15:1 Then Pharisees and experts in the law came from Jerusalem to Jesus and said,
MAT 15:2 “Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don’t wash their hands when they eat.”
MAT 15:3 He answered them, “And why do you disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition?
MAT 15:4 For God said, ‘ Honor your father and mother’ and ‘ Whoever insults his father or mother must be put to death.’
MAT 15:5 But you say, ‘If someone tells his father or mother, “Whatever help you would have received from me is given to God,”
MAT 15:6 he does not need to honor his father.’ You have nullified the word of God on account of your tradition.
MAT 15:7 Hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied correctly about you when he said,
MAT 15:8 ‘ This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me,
MAT 15:9 and they worship me in vain, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’”
MAT 15:10 Then he called the crowd to him and said, “Listen and understand.
MAT 15:11 What defiles a person is not what goes into the mouth; it is what comes out of the mouth that defiles a person.”
MAT 15:12 Then the disciples came to him and said, “Do you know that when the Pharisees heard this saying they were offended?”
MAT 15:13 And he replied, “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
MAT 15:14 Leave them! They are blind guides. If someone who is blind leads another who is blind, both will fall into a pit.”
MAT 15:15 But Peter said to him, “Explain this parable to us.”
MAT 15:16 Jesus said, “Even after all this, are you still so foolish?
MAT 15:17 Don’t you understand that whatever goes into the mouth enters the stomach and then passes out into the sewer?
MAT 15:18 But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these things defile a person.
MAT 15:19 For out of the heart come evil ideas, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander.
MAT 15:20 These are the things that defile a person; it is not eating with unwashed hands that defiles a person.”
MAT 15:21 After going out from there, Jesus went to the region of Tyre
MAT 15:22 A Canaanite woman from that area came and cried out, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is horribly demon-possessed!”
MAT 15:23 But he did not answer her a word. Then his disciples came and begged him, “Send her away, because she keeps on crying out after us.”
MAT 15:24 So he answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
MAT 15:25 But she came and bowed down before him and said, “Lord, help me!”
MAT 15:26 “It is not right to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs,” he said.
MAT 15:27 “Yes, Lord,” she replied, “but even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.”
MAT 15:28 Then Jesus answered her, “Woman, your faith is great! Let what you want be done for you.” And her daughter was healed from that hour.
MAT 15:29 When he left there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee. Then he went up a mountain, where he sat down.
MAT 15:30 Then large crowds came to him bringing with them the lame, blind, crippled, mute, and many others. They laid them at his feet, and he healed them.
MAT 15:31 As a result, the crowd was amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled healthy, the lame walking, and the blind seeing, and they praised the God of Israel.
MAT 15:32 Then Jesus called the disciples and said, “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have already been here with me three days and they have nothing to eat. I don’t want to send them away hungry since they may faint on the way.”
MAT 15:33 The disciples said to him, “Where can we get enough bread in this desolate place to satisfy so great a crowd?”
MAT 15:34 Jesus said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven – and a few small fish.”
MAT 15:35 After instructing the crowd to sit down on the ground,
MAT 15:36 he took the seven loaves and the fish, and after giving thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples, who then gave them to the crowds.
MAT 15:37 They all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full.
MAT 15:38 Not counting children and women, there were four thousand men who ate.
MAT 15:39 After sending away the crowd, he got into the boat and went to the region of Magadan.
MAT 16:1 Now when the Pharisees and Sadducees came to test Jesus, they asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
MAT 16:2 He said, “When evening comes you say, ‘It will be fair weather, because the sky is red,’
MAT 16:3 and in the morning, ‘It will be stormy today, because the sky is red and darkening.’ You know how to judge correctly the appearance of the sky, but you cannot evaluate the signs of the times.
MAT 16:4 A wicked and adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.” Then he left them and went away.
MAT 16:5 When the disciples went to the other side, they forgot to take bread.
MAT 16:6 “Watch out,” Jesus said to them, “beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
MAT 16:7 So they began to discuss this among themselves, saying, “It is because we brought no bread.”
MAT 16:8 When Jesus learned of this, he said, “You who have such little faith! Why are you arguing among yourselves about having no bread?
MAT 16:9 Do you still not understand? Don’t you remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up?
MAT 16:10 Or the seven loaves for the four thousand and how many baskets you took up?
MAT 16:11 How could you not understand that I was not speaking to you about bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees!”
MAT 16:12 Then they understood that he had not told them to be on guard against the yeast in bread, but against the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
MAT 16:13 When Jesus came to the area of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?”
MAT 16:14 They answered, “Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah, and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
MAT 16:15 He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?”
MAT 16:16 Simon Peter answered, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
MAT 16:17 And Jesus answered him, “You are blessed, Simon son of Jonah, because flesh and blood did not reveal this to you, but my Father in heaven!
MAT 16:18 And I tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not overpower it.
MAT 16:19 I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven.”
MAT 16:20 Then he instructed his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Christ.
MAT 16:21 From that time on Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the elders, chief priests, and experts in the law, and be killed, and on the third day be raised.
MAT 16:22 So Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him: “God forbid, Lord! This must not happen to you!”
MAT 16:23 But he turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you are not setting your mind on God’s interests, but on man’s.”
MAT 16:24 Then Jesus said to his disciples, “If anyone wants to become my follower, he must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
MAT 16:25 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
MAT 16:26 For what does it benefit a person if he gains the whole world but forfeits his life? Or what can a person give in exchange for his life?
MAT 16:27 For the Son of Man will come with his angels in the glory of his Father, and then he will reward each person according to what he has done.
MAT 16:28 I tell you the truth, there are some standing here who will not experience death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”
MAT 17:1 Six days later Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John the brother of James, and led them privately up a high mountain.
MAT 17:2 And he was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and his clothes became white as light.
MAT 17:3 Then Moses and Elijah also appeared before them, talking with him.
MAT 17:4 So Peter said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you want, I will make three shelters – one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
MAT 17:5 While he was still speaking, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and a voice from the cloud said, “This is my one dear Son, in whom I take great delight. Listen to him!”
MAT 17:6 When the disciples heard this, they were overwhelmed with fear and threw themselves down with their faces to the ground.
MAT 17:7 But Jesus came and touched them. “Get up,” he said. “Do not be afraid.”
MAT 17:8 When they looked up, all they saw was Jesus alone.
MAT 17:9 As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, “Do not tell anyone about the vision until the Son of Man is raised from the dead.”
MAT 17:10 The disciples asked him, “Why then do the experts in the law say that Elijah must come first?”
MAT 17:11 He answered, “Elijah does indeed come first and will restore all things.
MAT 17:12 And I tell you that Elijah has already come. Yet they did not recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted. In the same way, the Son of Man will suffer at their hands.”
MAT 17:13 Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them about John the Baptist.
MAT 17:14 When they came to the crowd, a man came to him, knelt before him,
MAT 17:15 and said, “Lord, have mercy on my son, because he has seizures and suffers terribly, for he often falls into the fire and into the water.
MAT 17:16 I brought him to your disciples, but they were not able to heal him.”
MAT 17:17 Jesus answered, “You unbelieving and perverse generation! How much longer must I be with you? How much longer must I endure you? Bring him here to me.”
MAT 17:18 Then Jesus rebuked the demon and it came out of him, and the boy was healed from that moment.
MAT 17:19 Then the disciples came to Jesus privately and said, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?”
MAT 17:20 He told them, “It was because of your little faith. I tell you the truth, if you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; nothing will be impossible for you.”
MAT 17:21 
MAT 17:22 When they gathered together in Galilee, Jesus told them, “The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men.
MAT 17:23 They will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised.” And they became greatly distressed.
MAT 17:24 After they arrived in Capernaum, the collectors of the temple tax came to Peter and said, “Your teacher pays the double drachma tax, doesn’t he?”
MAT 17:25 He said, “Yes.” When Peter came into the house, Jesus spoke to him first, “What do you think, Simon? From whom do earthly kings collect tolls or taxes – from their sons or from foreigners?”
MAT 17:26 After he said, “From foreigners,” Jesus said to him, “Then the sons are free.
MAT 17:27 But so that we don’t offend them, go to the lake and throw out a hook. Take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth, you will find a four drachma coin. Take that and give it to them for me and you.”
MAT 18:1 At that time the disciples came to Jesus saying, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
MAT 18:2 He called a child, had him stand among them,
MAT 18:3 and said, “I tell you the truth, unless you turn around and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven!
MAT 18:4 Whoever then humbles himself like this little child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 18:5 And whoever welcomes a child like this in my name welcomes me.
MAT 18:6 “But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a huge millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the open sea.
MAT 18:7 Woe to the world because of stumbling blocks! It is necessary that stumbling blocks come, but woe to the person through whom they come.
MAT 18:8 If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life crippled or lame than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire.
MAT 18:9 And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into fiery hell.
MAT 18:10 “See that you do not disdain one of these little ones. For I tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.
MAT 18:11 
MAT 18:12 What do you think? If someone owns a hundred sheep and one of them goes astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountains and go look for the one that went astray?
MAT 18:13 And if he finds it, I tell you the truth, he will rejoice more over it than over the ninety-nine that did not go astray.
MAT 18:14 In the same way, your Father in heaven is not willing that one of these little ones be lost.
MAT 18:15 “If your brother sins, go and show him his fault when the two of you are alone. If he listens to you, you have regained your brother.
MAT 18:16 But if he does not listen, take one or two others with you, so that at the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter may be established.
MAT 18:17 If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church. If he refuses to listen to the church, treat him like a Gentile or a tax collector.
MAT 18:18 “I tell you the truth, whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven.
MAT 18:19 Again, I tell you the truth, if two of you on earth agree about whatever you ask, my Father in heaven will do it for you.
MAT 18:20 For where two or three are assembled in my name, I am there among them.”
MAT 18:21 Then Peter came to him and said, “Lord, how many times must I forgive my brother who sins against me? As many as seven times?”
MAT 18:22 Jesus said to him, “Not seven times, I tell you, but seventy-seven times!
MAT 18:23 “For this reason, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his slaves.
MAT 18:24 As he began settling his accounts, a man who owed ten thousand talents was brought to him.
MAT 18:25 Because he was not able to repay it, the lord ordered him to be sold, along with his wife, children, and whatever he possessed, and repayment to be made.
MAT 18:26 Then the slave threw himself to the ground before him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will repay you everything.’
MAT 18:27 The lord had compassion on that slave and released him, and forgave him the debt.
MAT 18:28 After he went out, that same slave found one of his fellow slaves who owed him one hundred silver coins. So he grabbed him by the throat and started to choke him, saying, ‘Pay back what you owe me!’
MAT 18:29 Then his fellow slave threw himself down and begged him, ‘Be patient with me, and I will repay you.’
MAT 18:30 But he refused. Instead, he went out and threw him in prison until he repaid the debt.
MAT 18:31 When his fellow slaves saw what had happened, they were very upset and went and told their lord everything that had taken place.
MAT 18:32 Then his lord called the first slave and said to him, ‘Evil slave! I forgave you all that debt because you begged me!
MAT 18:33 Should you not have shown mercy to your fellow slave, just as I showed it to you?’
MAT 18:34 And in anger his lord turned him over to the prison guards to torture him until he repaid all he owed.
MAT 18:35 So also my heavenly Father will do to you, if each of you does not forgive your brother from your heart.”
MAT 19:1 Now when Jesus finished these sayings, he left Galilee and went to the region of Judea beyond the Jordan River.
MAT 19:2 Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
MAT 19:3 Then some Pharisees came to him in order to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful to divorce a wife for any cause?”
MAT 19:4 He answered, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator made them male and female them male and female,
MAT 19:5 and said, ‘ For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and will be united with his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
MAT 19:6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
MAT 19:7 They said to him, “Why then did Moses command us to give a certificate of dismissal and to divorce her?”
MAT 19:8 Jesus said to them, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because of your hard hearts, but from the beginning it was not this way.
MAT 19:9 Now I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except for immorality, and marries another commits adultery.”
MAT 19:10 The disciples said to him, “If this is the case of a husband with a wife, it is better not to marry!”
MAT 19:11 He said to them, “Not everyone can accept this statement, except those to whom it has been given.
MAT 19:12 For there are some eunuchs who were that way from birth, and some who were made eunuchs by others, and some who became eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who is able to accept this should accept it.”
MAT 19:13 Then little children were brought to him for him to lay his hands on them and pray. But the disciples scolded those who brought them.
MAT 19:14 But Jesus said, “Let the little children come to me and do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
MAT 19:15 And he placed his hands on them and went on his way.
MAT 19:16 Now someone came up to him and said, “Teacher, what good thing must I do to gain eternal life?”
MAT 19:17 He said to him, “Why do you ask me about what is good? There is only one who is good. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments.”
MAT 19:18 “Which ones?” he asked. Jesus replied, “ Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony,
MAT 19:19 honor your father and mother, and love your neighbor as yourself your neighbor as yourself.”
MAT 19:20 The young man said to him, “I have wholeheartedly obeyed all these laws. What do I still lack?”
MAT 19:21 Jesus said to him, “If you wish to be perfect, go sell your possessions and give the money to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”
MAT 19:22 But when the young man heard this he went away sorrowful, for he was very rich.
MAT 19:23 Then Jesus said to his disciples, “I tell you the truth, it will be hard for a rich person to enter the kingdom of heaven!
MAT 19:24 Again I say, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter into the kingdom of God.”
MAT 19:25 The disciples were greatly astonished when they heard this and said, “Then who can be saved?”
MAT 19:26 Jesus looked at them and replied, “This is impossible for mere humans, but for God all things are possible.”
MAT 19:27 Then Peter said to him, “Look, we have left everything to follow you! What then will there be for us?”
MAT 19:28 Jesus said to them, “I tell you the truth: In the age when all things are renewed, when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
MAT 19:29 And whoever has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life.
MAT 19:30 But many who are first will be last, and the last first.
MAT 20:1 “For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
MAT 20:2 And after agreeing with the workers for the standard wage, he sent them into his vineyard.
MAT 20:3 When it was about nine o’clock in the morning, he went out again and saw others standing around in the marketplace without work.
MAT 20:4 He said to them, ‘You go into the vineyard too, and I will give you whatever is right.’
MAT 20:5 So they went. When he went out again about noon and three o’clock that afternoon, he did the same thing.
MAT 20:6 And about five o’clock that afternoon he went out and found others standing around, and said to them, ‘Why are you standing here all day without work?’
MAT 20:7 They said to him, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go and work in the vineyard too.’
MAT 20:8 When it was evening the owner of the vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the workers and give the pay starting with the last hired until the first.’
MAT 20:9 When those hired about five o’clock came, each received a full day’s pay.
MAT 20:10 And when those hired first came, they thought they would receive more. But each one also received the standard wage.
MAT 20:11 When they received it, they began to complain against the landowner,
MAT 20:12 saying, ‘These last fellows worked one hour, and you have made them equal to us who bore the hardship and burning heat of the day.’
MAT 20:13 And the landowner replied to one of them, ‘Friend, I am not treating you unfairly. Didn’t you agree with me to work for the standard wage?
MAT 20:14 Take what is yours and go. I want to give to this last man the same as I gave to you.
MAT 20:15 Am I not permitted to do what I want with what belongs to me? Or are you envious because I am generous?’
MAT 20:16 So the last will be first, and the first last.”
MAT 20:17 As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve aside privately and said to them on the way,
MAT 20:18 “Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the experts in the law. They will condemn him to death,
MAT 20:19 and will turn him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged severely and crucified. Yet on the third day, he will be raised.”
MAT 20:20 Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, and kneeling down she asked him for a favor.
MAT 20:21 He said to her, “What do you want?” She replied, “Permit these two sons of mine to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your kingdom.”
MAT 20:22 Jesus answered, “You don’t know what you are asking! Are you able to drink the cup I am about to drink?” They said to him, “We are able.”
MAT 20:23 He told them, “You will drink my cup, but to sit at my right and at my left is not mine to give. Rather, it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
MAT 20:24 Now when the other ten heard this, they were angry with the two brothers.
MAT 20:25 But Jesus called them and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those in high positions use their authority over them.
MAT 20:26 It must not be this way among you! Instead whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant,
MAT 20:27 and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave –
MAT 20:28 just as the Son of Man did not come to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
MAT 20:29 As they were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed them.
MAT 20:30 Two blind men were sitting by the road. When they heard that Jesus was passing by, they shouted, “Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David!”
MAT 20:31 The crowd scolded them to get them to be quiet. But they shouted even more loudly, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
MAT 20:32 Jesus stopped, called them, and said, “What do you want me to do for you?”
MAT 20:33 They said to him, “Lord, let our eyes be opened.”
MAT 20:34 Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight and followed him.
MAT 21:1 Now when they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage, at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,
MAT 21:2 telling them, “Go to the village ahead of you. Right away you will find a donkey tied there, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me.
MAT 21:3 If anyone says anything to you, you are to say, ‘The Lord needs them,’ and he will send them at once.”
MAT 21:4 This took place to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet:
MAT 21:5 “ Tell the people of Zion, ‘ Look, your king is coming to you, unassuming and seated on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
MAT 21:6 So the disciples went and did as Jesus had instructed them.
MAT 21:7 They brought the donkey and the colt and placed their cloaks on them, and he sat on them.
MAT 21:8 A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road. Others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
MAT 21:9 The crowds that went ahead of him and those following kept shouting, “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!”
MAT 21:10 As he entered Jerusalem the whole city was thrown into an uproar, saying, “Who is this?”
MAT 21:11 And the crowds were saying, “This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth in Galilee.”
MAT 21:12 Then Jesus entered the temple area and drove out all those who were selling and buying in the temple courts, and turned over the tables of the money changers and the chairs of those selling doves.
MAT 21:13 And he said to them, “It is written, ‘ My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are turning it into a den of robbers!”
MAT 21:14 The blind and lame came to him in the temple courts, and he healed them.
MAT 21:15 But when the chief priests and the experts in the law saw the wonderful things he did and heard the children crying out in the temple courts, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they became indignant
MAT 21:16 and said to him, “Do you hear what they are saying?” Jesus said to them, “Yes. Have you never read, ‘ Out of the mouths of children and nursing infants you have prepared praise for yourself’?”
MAT 21:17 And leaving them, he went out of the city to Bethany and spent the night there.
MAT 21:18 Now early in the morning, as he returned to the city, he was hungry.
MAT 21:19 After noticing a fig tree by the road he went to it, but found nothing on it except leaves. He said to it, “Never again will there be fruit from you!” And the fig tree withered at once.
MAT 21:20 When the disciples saw it they were amazed, saying, “How did the fig tree wither so quickly?”
MAT 21:21 Jesus answered them, “I tell you the truth, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.
MAT 21:22 And whatever you ask in prayer, if you believe, you will receive.”
MAT 21:23 Now after Jesus entered the temple courts, the chief priests and elders of the people came up to him as he was teaching and said, “By what authority are you doing these things, and who gave you this authority?”
MAT 21:24 Jesus answered them, “I will also ask you one question. If you answer me then I will also tell you by what authority I do these things.
MAT 21:25 Where did John’s baptism come from? From heaven or from people?” They discussed this among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’
MAT 21:26 But if we say, ‘From people,’ we fear the crowd, for they all consider John to be a prophet.”
MAT 21:27 So they answered Jesus, “We don’t know.” Then he said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
MAT 21:28 “What do you think? A man had two sons. He went to the first and said, ‘Son, go and work in the vineyard today.’
MAT 21:29 The boy answered, ‘I will not.’ But later he had a change of heart and went.
MAT 21:30 The father went to the other son and said the same thing. This boy answered, ‘I will, sir,’ but did not go.
MAT 21:31 Which of the two did his father’s will?” They said, “The first.” Jesus said to them, “I tell you the truth, tax collectors and prostitutes will go ahead of you into the kingdom of God!
MAT 21:32 For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him. But the tax collectors and prostitutes did believe. Although you saw this, you did not later change your minds and believe him.
MAT 21:33 “Listen to another parable: There was a landowner who planted a vineyard. He put a fence around it, dug a pit for its winepress, and built a watchtower. Then he leased it to tenant farmers and went on a journey.
MAT 21:34 When the harvest time was near, he sent his slaves to the tenants to collect his portion of the crop.
MAT 21:35 But the tenants seized his slaves, beat one, killed another, and stoned another.
MAT 21:36 Again he sent other slaves, more than the first, and they treated them the same way.
MAT 21:37 Finally he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
MAT 21:38 But when the tenants saw the son, they said to themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him and get his inheritance!’
MAT 21:39 So they seized him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
MAT 21:40 Now when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?”
MAT 21:41 They said to him, “He will utterly destroy those evil men! Then he will lease the vineyard to other tenants who will give him his portion at the harvest.”
MAT 21:42 Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the scriptures: ‘ The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. This is from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
MAT 21:43 For this reason I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
MAT 21:44 The one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, and the one on whom it falls will be crushed.”
MAT 21:45 When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they realized that he was speaking about them.
MAT 21:46 They wanted to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowds, because the crowds regarded him as a prophet.
MAT 22:1 Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying:
MAT 22:2 “The kingdom of heaven can be compared to a king who gave a wedding banquet for his son.
MAT 22:3 He sent his slaves to summon those who had been invited to the banquet, but they would not come.
MAT 22:4 Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those who have been invited, “Look! The feast I have prepared for you is ready. My oxen and fattened cattle have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.”’
MAT 22:5 But they were indifferent and went away, one to his farm, another to his business.
MAT 22:6 The rest seized his slaves, insolently mistreated them, and killed them.
MAT 22:7 The king was furious! He sent his soldiers, and they put those murderers to death and set their city on fire.
MAT 22:8 Then he said to his slaves, ‘The wedding is ready, but the ones who had been invited were not worthy.
MAT 22:9 So go into the main streets and invite everyone you find to the wedding banquet.’
MAT 22:10 And those slaves went out into the streets and gathered all they found, both bad and good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests.
MAT 22:11 But when the king came in to see the wedding guests, he saw a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes.
MAT 22:12 And he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you get in here without wedding clothes?’ But he had nothing to say.
MAT 22:13 Then the king said to his attendants, ‘Tie him up hand and foot and throw him into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth!’
MAT 22:14 For many are called, but few are chosen.”
MAT 22:15 Then the Pharisees went out and planned together to entrap him with his own words.
MAT 22:16 They sent to him their disciples along with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful, and teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. You do not court anyone’s favor because you show no partiality.
MAT 22:17 Tell us then, what do you think? Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
MAT 22:18 But Jesus realized their evil intentions and said, “Hypocrites! Why are you testing me?
MAT 22:19 Show me the coin used for the tax.” So they brought him a denarius.
MAT 22:20 Jesus said to them, “Whose image is this, and whose inscription?”
MAT 22:21 They replied, “Caesar’s.” He said to them, “Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”
MAT 22:22 Now when they heard this they were stunned, and they left him and went away.
MAT 22:23 The same day Sadducees (who say there is no resurrection) came to him and asked him,
MAT 22:24 “Teacher, Moses said, ‘ If a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and father children for his brother.’
MAT 22:25 Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children he left his wife to his brother.
MAT 22:26 The second did the same, and the third, down to the seventh.
MAT 22:27 Last of all, the woman died.
MAT 22:28 In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife of the seven will she be? For they all had married her.”
MAT 22:29 Jesus answered them, “You are deceived, because you don’t know the scriptures or the power of God.
MAT 22:30 For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.
MAT 22:31 Now as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God,
MAT 22:32 ‘ I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead but of the living!”
MAT 22:33 When the crowds heard this, they were amazed at his teaching.
MAT 22:34 Now when the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they assembled together.
MAT 22:35 And one of them, an expert in religious law, asked him a question to test him:
MAT 22:36 “Teacher, which commandment in the law is the greatest?”
MAT 22:37 Jesus said to him, “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.’
MAT 22:38 This is the first and greatest commandment.
MAT 22:39 The second is like it : ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’
MAT 22:40 All the law and the prophets depend on these two commandments.”
MAT 22:41 While the Pharisees were assembled, Jesus asked them a question:
MAT 22:42 “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said, “The son of David.”
MAT 22:43 He said to them, “How then does David by the Spirit call him ‘Lord,’ saying,
MAT 22:44 ‘ The Lord said to my lord, “ Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies under your feet”’?
MAT 22:45 If David then calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?”
MAT 22:46 No one was able to answer him a word, and from that day on no one dared to question him any longer.
MAT 23:1 Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples,
MAT 23:2 “The experts in the law and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ seat.
MAT 23:3 Therefore pay attention to what they tell you and do it. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they teach.
MAT 23:4 They tie up heavy loads, hard to carry, and put them on men’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing even to lift a finger to move them.
MAT 23:5 They do all their deeds to be seen by people, for they make their phylacteries wide and their tassels long.
MAT 23:6 They love the place of honor at banquets and the best seats in the synagogues
MAT 23:7 and elaborate greetings in the marketplaces, and to have people call them ‘Rabbi.’
MAT 23:8 But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you have one Teacher and you are all brothers.
MAT 23:9 And call no one your ‘father’ on earth, for you have one Father, who is in heaven.
MAT 23:10 Nor are you to be called ‘teacher,’ for you have one teacher, the Christ.
MAT 23:11 The greatest among you will be your servant.
MAT 23:12 And whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
MAT 23:13 “But woe to you, experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You keep locking people out of the kingdom of heaven! For you neither enter nor permit those trying to enter to go in.
MAT 23:14 
MAT 23:15 “Woe to you, experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You cross land and sea to make one convert, and when you get one, you make him twice as much a child of hell as yourselves!
MAT 23:16 “Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘Whoever swears by the temple is bound by nothing. But whoever swears by the gold of the temple is bound by the oath.’
MAT 23:17 Blind fools! Which is greater, the gold or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
MAT 23:18 And, ‘Whoever swears by the altar is bound by nothing. But if anyone swears by the gift on it he is bound by the oath.’
MAT 23:19 You are blind! For which is greater, the gift or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
MAT 23:20 So whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
MAT 23:21 And whoever swears by the temple swears by it and the one who dwells in it.
MAT 23:22 And whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and the one who sits on it.
MAT 23:23 “Woe to you, experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You give a tenth of mint, dill, and cumin, yet you neglect what is more important in the law – justice, mercy, and faithfulness! You should have done these things without neglecting the others.
MAT 23:24 Blind guides! You strain out a gnat yet swallow a camel!
MAT 23:25 “Woe to you, experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You clean the outside of the cup and the dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.
MAT 23:26 Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup, so that the outside may become clean too!
MAT 23:27 “Woe to you, experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs that look beautiful on the outside but inside are full of the bones of the dead and of everything unclean.
MAT 23:28 In the same way, on the outside you look righteous to people, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
MAT 23:29 “Woe to you, experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous.
MAT 23:30 And you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our ancestors, we would not have participated with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
MAT 23:31 By saying this you testify against yourselves that you are descendants of those who murdered the prophets.
MAT 23:32 Fill up then the measure of your ancestors!
MAT 23:33 You snakes, you offspring of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell?
MAT 23:34 “For this reason I am sending you prophets and wise men and experts in the law, some of whom you will kill and crucify, and some you will flog in your synagogues and pursue from town to town,
MAT 23:35 so that on you will come all the righteous blood shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barachiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
MAT 23:36 I tell you the truth, this generation will be held responsible for all these things!
MAT 23:37 “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those who are sent to you! How often I have longed to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you would have none of it!
MAT 23:38 Look, your house is left to you desolate!
MAT 23:39 For I tell you, you will not see me from now until you say, ‘Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!’”
MAT 24:1 Now as Jesus was going out of the temple courts and walking away, his disciples came to show him the temple buildings.
MAT 24:2 And he said to them, “Do you see all these things? I tell you the truth, not one stone will be left on another. All will be torn down!”
MAT 24:3 As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, his disciples came to him privately and said, “Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?”
MAT 24:4 Jesus answered them, “Watch out that no one misleads you.
MAT 24:5 For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will mislead many.
MAT 24:6 You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. Make sure that you are not alarmed, for this must happen, but the end is still to come.
MAT 24:7 For nation will rise up in arms against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
MAT 24:8 All these things are the beginning of birth pains.
MAT 24:9 “Then they will hand you over to be persecuted and will kill you. You will be hated by all the nations because of my name.
MAT 24:10 Then many will be led into sin, and they will betray one another and hate one another.
MAT 24:11 And many false prophets will appear and deceive many,
MAT 24:12 and because lawlessness will increase so much, the love of many will grow cold.
MAT 24:13 But the person who endures to the end will be saved.
MAT 24:14 And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached throughout the whole inhabited earth as a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.
MAT 24:15 “So when you see the abomination of desolation – spoken about by Daniel the prophet – standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),
MAT 24:16 then those in Judea must flee to the mountains.
MAT 24:17 The one on the roof must not come down to take anything out of his house,
MAT 24:18 and the one in the field must not turn back to get his cloak.
MAT 24:19 Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing their babies in those days!
MAT 24:20 Pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a Sabbath.
MAT 24:21 For then there will be great suffering unlike anything that has happened from the beginning of the world until now, or ever will happen.
MAT 24:22 And if those days had not been cut short, no one would be saved. But for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short.
MAT 24:23 Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘There he is!’ do not believe him.
MAT 24:24 For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
MAT 24:25 Remember, I have told you ahead of time.
MAT 24:26 So then, if someone says to you, ‘Look, he is in the wilderness,’ do not go out, or ‘Look, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe him.
MAT 24:27 For just like the lightning comes from the east and flashes to the west, so the coming of the Son of Man will be.
MAT 24:28 Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather.
MAT 24:29 “Immediately after the suffering of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven will be shaken.
MAT 24:30 Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will mourn. They will see the Son of Man arriving on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
MAT 24:31 And he will send his angels with a loud trumpet blast, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
MAT 24:32 “Learn this parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near.
MAT 24:33 So also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near, right at the door.
MAT 24:34 I tell you the truth, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place.
MAT 24:35 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
MAT 24:36 “But as for that day and hour no one knows it – not even the angels in heaven – except the Father alone.
MAT 24:37 For just like the days of Noah were, so the coming of the Son of Man will be.
MAT 24:38 For in those days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day Noah entered the ark.
MAT 24:39 And they knew nothing until the flood came and took them all away. It will be the same at the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT 24:40 Then there will be two men in the field; one will be taken and one left.
MAT 24:41 There will be two women grinding grain with a mill; one will be taken and one left.
MAT 24:42 “Therefore stay alert, because you do not know on what day your Lord will come.
MAT 24:43 But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have been alert and would not have let his house be broken into.
MAT 24:44 Therefore you also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.
MAT 24:45 “Who then is the faithful and wise slave, whom the master has put in charge of his household, to give the other slaves their food at the proper time?
MAT 24:46 Blessed is that slave whom the master finds at work when he comes.
MAT 24:47 I tell you the truth, the master will put him in charge of all his possessions.
MAT 24:48 But if that evil slave should say to himself, ‘My master is staying away a long time,’
MAT 24:49 and he begins to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with drunkards,
MAT 24:50 then the master of that slave will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not foresee,
MAT 24:51 and will cut him in two, and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
MAT 25:1 “At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
MAT 25:2 Five of the virgins were foolish, and five were wise.
MAT 25:3 When the foolish ones took their lamps, they did not take extra olive oil with them.
MAT 25:4 But the wise ones took flasks of olive oil with their lamps.
MAT 25:5 When the bridegroom was delayed a long time, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
MAT 25:6 But at midnight there was a shout, ‘Look, the bridegroom is here! Come out to meet him.’
MAT 25:7 Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
MAT 25:8 The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are going out.’
MAT 25:9 ‘No,’ they replied. ‘There won’t be enough for you and for us. Go instead to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’
MAT 25:10 But while they had gone to buy it, the bridegroom arrived, and those who were ready went inside with him to the wedding banquet. Then the door was shut.
MAT 25:11 Later, the other virgins came too, saying, ‘Lord, lord! Let us in!’
MAT 25:12 But he replied, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you!’
MAT 25:13 Therefore stay alert, because you do not know the day or the hour.
MAT 25:14 “For it is like a man going on a journey, who summoned his slaves and entrusted his property to them.
MAT 25:15 To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, each according to his ability. Then he went on his journey.
MAT 25:16 The one who had received five talents went off right away and put his money to work and gained five more.
MAT 25:17 In the same way, the one who had two gained two more.
MAT 25:18 But the one who had received one talent went out and dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money in it.
MAT 25:19 After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled his accounts with them.
MAT 25:20 The one who had received the five talents came and brought five more, saying, ‘Sir, you entrusted me with five talents. See, I have gained five more.’
MAT 25:21 His master answered, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You have been faithful in a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
MAT 25:22 The one with the two talents also came and said, ‘Sir, you entrusted two talents to me. See, I have gained two more.’
MAT 25:23 His master answered, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You have been faithful with a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
MAT 25:24 Then the one who had received the one talent came and said, ‘Sir, I knew that you were a hard man, harvesting where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter seed,
MAT 25:25 so I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent in the ground. See, you have what is yours.’
MAT 25:26 But his master answered, ‘Evil and lazy slave! So you knew that I harvest where I didn’t sow and gather where I didn’t scatter?
MAT 25:27 Then you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and on my return I would have received my money back with interest!
MAT 25:28 Therefore take the talent from him and give it to the one who has ten.
MAT 25:29 For the one who has will be given more, and he will have more than enough. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.
MAT 25:30 And throw that worthless slave into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
MAT 25:31 “When the Son of Man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne.
MAT 25:32 All the nations will be assembled before him, and he will separate people one from another like a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
MAT 25:33 He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
MAT 25:34 Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
MAT 25:35 For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in,
MAT 25:36 I was naked and you gave me clothing, I was sick and you took care of me, I was in prison and you visited me.’
MAT 25:37 Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
MAT 25:38 When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or naked and clothe you?
MAT 25:39 When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’
MAT 25:40 And the king will answer them, ‘I tell you the truth, just as you did it for one of the least of these brothers or sisters of mine, you did it for me.’
MAT 25:41 “Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you accursed, into the eternal fire that has been prepared for the devil and his angels!
MAT 25:42 For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink.
MAT 25:43 I was a stranger and you did not receive me as a guest, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’
MAT 25:44 Then they too will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not give you whatever you needed?’
MAT 25:45 Then he will answer them, ‘I tell you the truth, just as you did not do it for one of the least of these, you did not do it for me.’
MAT 25:46 And these will depart into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”
MAT 26:1 When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he told his disciples,
MAT 26:2 “You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.”
MAT 26:3 Then the chief priests and the elders of the people met together in the palace of the high priest, who was named Caiaphas.
MAT 26:4 They planned to arrest Jesus by stealth and kill him.
MAT 26:5 But they said, “Not during the feast, so that there won’t be a riot among the people.”
MAT 26:6 Now while Jesus was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper,
MAT 26:7 a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of expensive perfumed oil, and she poured it on his head as he was at the table.
MAT 26:8 When the disciples saw this, they became indignant and said, “Why this waste?
MAT 26:9 It could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor!”
MAT 26:10 When Jesus learned of this, he said to them, “Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a good service for me.
MAT 26:11 For you will always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me!
MAT 26:12 When she poured this oil on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
MAT 26:13 I tell you the truth, wherever this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her.”
MAT 26:14 Then one of the twelve, the one named Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests
MAT 26:15 and said, “What will you give me to betray him into your hands?” So they set out thirty silver coins for him.
MAT 26:16 From that time on, Judas began looking for an opportunity to betray him.
MAT 26:17 Now on the first day of the feast of Unleavened Bread the disciples came to Jesus and said, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
MAT 26:18 He said, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is near. I will observe the Passover with my disciples at your house.”’”
MAT 26:19 So the disciples did as Jesus had instructed them, and they prepared the Passover.
MAT 26:20 When it was evening, he took his place at the table with the twelve.
MAT 26:21 And while they were eating he said, “I tell you the truth, one of you will betray me.”
MAT 26:22 They became greatly distressed and each one began to say to him, “Surely not I, Lord?”
MAT 26:23 He answered, “The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me.
MAT 26:24 The Son of Man will go as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for him if he had never been born.”
MAT 26:25 Then Judas, the one who would betray him, said, “Surely not I, Rabbi?” Jesus replied, “You have said it yourself.”
MAT 26:26 While they were eating, Jesus took bread, and after giving thanks he broke it, gave it to his disciples, and said, “Take, eat, this is my body.”
MAT 26:27 And after taking the cup and giving thanks, he gave it to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you,
MAT 26:28 for this is my blood, the blood of the covenant, that is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
MAT 26:29 I tell you, from now on I will not drink of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.”
MAT 26:30 After singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
MAT 26:31 Then Jesus said to them, “This night you will all fall away because of me, for it is written: ‘ I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
MAT 26:32 But after I am raised, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
MAT 26:33 Peter said to him, “If they all fall away because of you, I will never fall away!”
MAT 26:34 Jesus said to him, “I tell you the truth, on this night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”
MAT 26:35 Peter said to him, “Even if I must die with you, I will never deny you.” And all the disciples said the same thing.
MAT 26:36 Then Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to the disciples, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.”
MAT 26:37 He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and became anguished and distressed.
MAT 26:38 Then he said to them, “My soul is deeply grieved, even to the point of death. Remain here and stay awake with me.”
MAT 26:39 Going a little farther, he threw himself down with his face to the ground and prayed, “My Father, if possible, let this cup pass from me! Yet not what I will, but what you will.”
MAT 26:40 Then he came to the disciples and found them sleeping. He said to Peter, “So, couldn’t you stay awake with me for one hour?
MAT 26:41 Stay awake and pray that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
MAT 26:42 He went away a second time and prayed, “My Father, if this cup cannot be taken away unless I drink it, your will must be done.”
MAT 26:43 He came again and found them sleeping; they could not keep their eyes open.
MAT 26:44 So leaving them again, he went away and prayed for the third time, saying the same thing once more.
MAT 26:45 Then he came to the disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour is approaching, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
MAT 26:46 Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer is approaching!”
MAT 26:47 While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived. With him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests and elders of the people.
MAT 26:48 (Now the betrayer had given them a sign, saying, “The one I kiss is the man. Arrest him!”)
MAT 26:49 Immediately he went up to Jesus and said, “Greetings, Rabbi,” and kissed him.
MAT 26:50 Jesus said to him, “Friend, do what you are here to do.” Then they came and took hold of Jesus and arrested him.
MAT 26:51 But one of those with Jesus grabbed his sword, drew it out, and struck the high priest’s slave, cutting off his ear.
MAT 26:52 Then Jesus said to him, “Put your sword back in its place! For all who take hold of the sword will die by the sword.
MAT 26:53 Or do you think that I cannot call on my Father, and that he would send me more than twelve legions of angels right now?
MAT 26:54 How then would the scriptures that say it must happen this way be fulfilled?”
MAT 26:55 At that moment Jesus said to the crowd, “Have you come out with swords and clubs to arrest me like you would an outlaw? Day after day I sat teaching in the temple courts, yet you did not arrest me.
MAT 26:56 But this has happened so that the scriptures of the prophets would be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples left him and fled.
MAT 26:57 Now the ones who had arrested Jesus led him to Caiaphas, the high priest, in whose house the experts in the law and the elders had gathered.
MAT 26:58 But Peter was following him from a distance, all the way to the high priest’s courtyard. After going in, he sat with the guards to see the outcome.
MAT 26:59 The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were trying to find false testimony against Jesus so that they could put him to death.
MAT 26:60 But they did not find anything, though many false witnesses came forward. Finally two came forward
MAT 26:61 and declared, “This man said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.’”
MAT 26:62 So the high priest stood up and said to him, “Have you no answer? What is this that they are testifying against you?”
MAT 26:63 But Jesus was silent. The high priest said to him, “I charge you under oath by the living God, tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.”
MAT 26:64 Jesus said to him, “You have said it yourself. But I tell you, from now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
MAT 26:65 Then the high priest tore his clothes and declared, “He has blasphemed! Why do we still need witnesses? Now you have heard the blasphemy!
MAT 26:66 What is your verdict?” They answered, “He is guilty and deserves death.”
MAT 26:67 Then they spat in his face and struck him with their fists. And some slapped him,
MAT 26:68 saying, “Prophesy for us, you Christ! Who hit you?”
MAT 26:69 Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard. A slave girl came to him and said, “You also were with Jesus the Galilean.”
MAT 26:70 But he denied it in front of them all: “I don’t know what you’re talking about!”
MAT 26:71 When he went out to the gateway, another slave girl saw him and said to the people there, “This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.”
MAT 26:72 He denied it again with an oath, “I do not know the man!”
MAT 26:73 After a little while, those standing there came up to Peter and said, “You really are one of them too – even your accent gives you away!”
MAT 26:74 At that he began to curse, and he swore with an oath, “I do not know the man!” At that moment a rooster crowed.
MAT 26:75 Then Peter remembered what Jesus had said: “Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.” And he went outside and wept bitterly.
MAT 27:1 When it was early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people plotted against Jesus to execute him.
MAT 27:2 They tied him up, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate the governor.
MAT 27:3 Now when Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus had been condemned, he regretted what he had done and returned the thirty silver coins to the chief priests and the elders,
MAT 27:4 saying, “I have sinned by betraying innocent blood!” But they said, “What is that to us? You take care of it yourself!”
MAT 27:5 So Judas threw the silver coins into the temple and left. Then he went out and hanged himself.
MAT 27:6 The chief priests took the silver and said, “It is not lawful to put this into the temple treasury, since it is blood money.”
MAT 27:7 After consulting together they bought the Potter’s Field with it, as a burial place for foreigners.
MAT 27:8 For this reason that field has been called the “Field of Blood” to this day.
MAT 27:9 Then what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled : “They took the thirty silver coins, the price of the one whose price had been set by the people of Israel,
MAT 27:10 and they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me.”
MAT 27:11 Then Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” Jesus said, “You say so.”
MAT 27:12 But when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he did not respond.
MAT 27:13 Then Pilate said to him, “Don’t you hear how many charges they are bringing against you?”
MAT 27:14 But he did not answer even one accusation, so that the governor was quite amazed.
MAT 27:15 During the feast the governor was accustomed to release one prisoner to the crowd, whomever they wanted.
MAT 27:16 At that time they had in custody a notorious prisoner named Jesus Barabbas.
MAT 27:17 So after they had assembled, Pilate said to them, “Whom do you want me to release for you, Jesus Barabbas or Jesus who is called the Christ?”
MAT 27:18 (For he knew that they had handed him over because of envy.)
MAT 27:19 As he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent a message to him: “Have nothing to do with that innocent man; I have suffered greatly as a result of a dream about him today.”
MAT 27:20 But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus killed.
MAT 27:21 The governor asked them, “Which of the two do you want me to release for you?” And they said, “Barabbas!”
MAT 27:22 Pilate said to them, “Then what should I do with Jesus who is called the Christ?” They all said, “Crucify him!”
MAT 27:23 He asked, “Why? What wrong has he done?” But they shouted more insistently, “Crucify him!”
MAT 27:24 When Pilate saw that he could do nothing, but that instead a riot was starting, he took some water, washed his hands before the crowd and said, “I am innocent of this man’s blood. You take care of it yourselves!”
MAT 27:25 In reply all the people said, “Let his blood be on us and on our children!”
MAT 27:26 Then he released Barabbas for them. But after he had Jesus flogged, he handed him over to be crucified.
MAT 27:27 Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the governor’s residence and gathered the whole cohort around him.
MAT 27:28 They stripped him and put a scarlet robe around him,
MAT 27:29 and after braiding a crown of thorns, they put it on his head. They put a staff in his right hand, and kneeling down before him, they mocked him: “Hail, king of the Jews!”
MAT 27:30 They spat on him and took the staff and struck him repeatedly on the head.
MAT 27:31 When they had mocked him, they stripped him of the robe and put his own clothes back on him. Then they led him away to crucify him.
MAT 27:32 As they were going out, they found a man from Cyrene named Simon, whom they forced to carry his cross.
MAT 27:33 They came to a place called Golgotha (which means “Place of the Skull”)
MAT 27:34 and offered Jesus wine mixed with gall to drink. But after tasting it, he would not drink it.
MAT 27:35 When they had crucified him, they divided his clothes by throwing dice.
MAT 27:36 Then they sat down and kept guard over him there.
MAT 27:37 Above his head they put the charge against him, which read: “This is Jesus, the king of the Jews.”
MAT 27:38 Then two outlaws were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.
MAT 27:39 Those who passed by defamed him, shaking their heads
MAT 27:40 and saying, “You who can destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save yourself! If you are God’s Son, come down from the cross!”
MAT 27:41 In the same way even the chief priests – together with the experts in the law and elders – were mocking him:
MAT 27:42 “He saved others, but he cannot save himself! He is the king of Israel! If he comes down now from the cross, we will believe in him!
MAT 27:43 He trusts in God – let God, if he wants to, deliver him now because he said, ‘I am God’s Son’!”
MAT 27:44 The robbers who were crucified with him also spoke abusively to him.
MAT 27:45 Now from noon until three, darkness came over all the land.
MAT 27:46 At about three o’clock Jesus shouted with a loud voice, “ Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani? ” that is, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
MAT 27:47 When some of the bystanders heard it, they said, “This man is calling for Elijah.”
MAT 27:48 Immediately one of them ran and got a sponge, filled it with sour wine, put it on a stick, and gave it to him to drink.
MAT 27:49 But the rest said, “Leave him alone! Let’s see if Elijah will come to save him.”
MAT 27:50 Then Jesus cried out again with a loud voice and gave up his spirit.
MAT 27:51 Just then the temple curtain was torn in two, from top to bottom. The earth shook and the rocks were split apart.
MAT 27:52 And tombs were opened, and the bodies of many saints who had died were raised.
MAT 27:53 (They came out of the tombs after his resurrection and went into the holy city and appeared to many people.)
MAT 27:54 Now when the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and what took place, they were extremely terrified and said, “Truly this one was God’s Son!”
MAT 27:55 Many women who had followed Jesus from Galilee and given him support were also there, watching from a distance.
MAT 27:56 Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
MAT 27:57 Now when it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who was also a disciple of Jesus.
MAT 27:58 He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate ordered that it be given to him.
MAT 27:59 Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
MAT 27:60 and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut in the rock. Then he rolled a great stone across the entrance of the tomb and went away.
MAT 27:61 (Now Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there, opposite the tomb.)
MAT 27:62 The next day (which is after the day of preparation) the chief priests and the Pharisees assembled before Pilate
MAT 27:63 and said, “Sir, we remember that while that deceiver was still alive he said, ‘After three days I will rise again.’
MAT 27:64 So give orders to secure the tomb until the third day. Otherwise his disciples may come and steal his body and say to the people, ‘He has been raised from the dead,’ and the last deception will be worse than the first.”
MAT 27:65 Pilate said to them, “Take a guard of soldiers. Go and make it as secure as you can.”
MAT 27:66 So they went with the soldiers of the guard and made the tomb secure by sealing the stone.
MAT 28:1 Now after the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb.
MAT 28:2 Suddenly there was a severe earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descending from heaven came and rolled away the stone and sat on it.
MAT 28:3 His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow.
MAT 28:4 The guards were shaken and became like dead men because they were so afraid of him.
MAT 28:5 But the angel said to the women, “Do not be afraid; I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified.
MAT 28:6 He is not here, for he has been raised, just as he said. Come and see the place where he was lying.
MAT 28:7 Then go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has been raised from the dead. He is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there.’ Listen, I have told you!”
MAT 28:8 So they left the tomb quickly, with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples.
MAT 28:9 But Jesus met them, saying, “Greetings!” They came to him, held on to his feet and worshiped him.
MAT 28:10 Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee. They will see me there.”
MAT 28:11 While they were going, some of the guard went into the city and told the chief priests everything that had happened.
MAT 28:12 After they had assembled with the elders and formed a plan, they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers,
MAT 28:13 telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came at night and stole his body while we were asleep.’
MAT 28:14 If this matter is heard before the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”
MAT 28:15 So they took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story is told among the Jews to this day.
MAT 28:16 So the eleven disciples went to Galilee to the mountain Jesus had designated.
MAT 28:17 When they saw him, they worshiped him, but some doubted.
MAT 28:18 Then Jesus came up and said to them, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
MAT 28:19 Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit,
MAT 28:20 teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And remember, I am with you always, to the end of the age.”
MAR 1:1 The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
MAR 1:2 As it is written in Isaiah the prophet, “ Look, I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way,
MAR 1:3 the voice of one shouting in the wilderness, ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord, make his paths straight.’”
MAR 1:4 In the wilderness John the baptizer began preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
MAR 1:5 People from the whole Judean countryside and all of Jerusalem were going out to him, and he was baptizing them in the Jordan River as they confessed their sins.
MAR 1:6 John wore a garment made of camel’s hair with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
MAR 1:7 He proclaimed, “One more powerful than I am is coming after me; I am not worthy to bend down and untie the strap of his sandals.
MAR 1:8 I baptize you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
MAR 1:9 Now in those days Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan River.
MAR 1:10 And just as Jesus was coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens splitting apart and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.
MAR 1:11 And a voice came from heaven: “You are my one dear Son; in you I take great delight.”
MAR 1:12 The Spirit immediately drove him into the wilderness.
MAR 1:13 He was in the wilderness forty days, enduring temptations from Satan. He was with wild animals, and angels were ministering to his needs.
MAR 1:14 Now after John was imprisoned, Jesus went into Galilee and proclaimed the gospel of God.
MAR 1:15 He said, “The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe the gospel!”
MAR 1:16 As he went along the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew, Simon’s brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were fishermen).
MAR 1:17 Jesus said to them, “Follow me, and I will turn you into fishers of people.”
MAR 1:18 They left their nets immediately and followed him.
MAR 1:19 Going on a little farther, he saw James, the son of Zebedee, and John his brother in their boat mending nets.
MAR 1:20 Immediately he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him.
MAR 1:21 Then they went to Capernaum. When the Sabbath came, Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.
MAR 1:22 The people there were amazed by his teaching, because he taught them like one who had authority, not like the experts in the law.
MAR 1:23 Just then there was a man in their synagogue with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,
MAR 1:24 “Leave us alone, Jesus the Nazarene! Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are – the Holy One of God!”
MAR 1:25 But Jesus rebuked him: “Silence! Come out of him!”
MAR 1:26 After throwing him into convulsions, the unclean spirit cried out with a loud voice and came out of him.
MAR 1:27 They were all amazed so that they asked each other, “What is this? A new teaching with authority! He even commands the unclean spirits and they obey him.”
MAR 1:28 So the news about him spread quickly throughout all the region around Galilee.
MAR 1:29 Now as soon as they left the synagogue, they entered Simon and Andrew’s house, with James and John.
MAR 1:30 Simon’s mother-in-law was lying down, sick with a fever, so they spoke to Jesus at once about her.
MAR 1:31 He came and raised her up by gently taking her hand. Then the fever left her and she began to serve them.
MAR 1:32 When it was evening, after sunset, they brought to him all who were sick and demon-possessed.
MAR 1:33 The whole town gathered by the door.
MAR 1:34 So he healed many who were sick with various diseases and drove out many demons. But he would not permit the demons to speak, because they knew him.
MAR 1:35 Then Jesus got up early in the morning when it was still very dark, departed, and went out to a deserted place, and there he spent time in prayer.
MAR 1:36 Simon and his companions searched for him.
MAR 1:37 When they found him, they said, “Everyone is looking for you.”
MAR 1:38 He replied, “Let us go elsewhere, into the surrounding villages, so that I can preach there too. For that is what I came out here to do.”
MAR 1:39 So he went into all of Galilee preaching in their synagogues and casting out demons.
MAR 1:40 Now a leper came to him and fell to his knees, asking for help. “If you are willing, you can make me clean,” he said.
MAR 1:41 Moved with compassion, Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing. Be clean!”
MAR 1:42 The leprosy left him at once, and he was clean.
MAR 1:43 Immediately Jesus sent the man away with a very strong warning.
MAR 1:44 He told him, “See that you do not say anything to anyone, but go, show yourself to a priest, and bring the offering that Moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.”
MAR 1:45 But as the man went out he began to announce it publicly and spread the story widely, so that Jesus was no longer able to enter any town openly but stayed outside in remote places. Still they kept coming to him from everywhere.
MAR 2:1 Now after some days, when he returned to Capernaum, the news spread that he was at home.
MAR 2:2 So many gathered that there was no longer any room, not even by the door, and he preached the word to them.
MAR 2:3 Some people came bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them.
MAR 2:4 When they were not able to bring him in because of the crowd, they removed the roof above Jesus. Then, after tearing it out, they lowered the stretcher the paralytic was lying on.
MAR 2:5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven.”
MAR 2:6 Now some of the experts in the law were sitting there, turning these things over in their minds:
MAR 2:7 “Why does this man speak this way? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
MAR 2:8 Now immediately, when Jesus realized in his spirit that they were contemplating such thoughts, he said to them, “Why are you thinking such things in your hearts?
MAR 2:9 Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Stand up, take your stretcher, and walk’?
MAR 2:10 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins,” – he said to the paralytic –
MAR 2:11 “I tell you, stand up, take your stretcher, and go home.”
MAR 2:12 And immediately the man stood up, took his stretcher, and went out in front of them all. They were all amazed and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this!”
MAR 2:13 Jesus went out again by the sea. The whole crowd came to him, and he taught them.
MAR 2:14 As he went along, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the tax booth. “Follow me,” he said to him. And he got up and followed him.
MAR 2:15 As Jesus was having a meal in Levi’s home, many tax collectors and sinners were eating with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many who followed him.
MAR 2:16 When the experts in the law and the Pharisees saw that he was eating with sinners and tax collectors, they said to his disciples, “Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
MAR 2:17 When Jesus heard this he said to them, “Those who are healthy don’t need a physician, but those who are sick do. I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
MAR 2:18 Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting. So they came to Jesus and said, “Why do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don’t fast?”
MAR 2:19 Jesus said to them, “The wedding guests cannot fast while the bridegroom is with them, can they? As long as they have the bridegroom with them they do not fast.
MAR 2:20 But the days are coming when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and at that time they will fast.
MAR 2:21 No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; otherwise, the patch pulls away from it, the new from the old, and the tear becomes worse.
MAR 2:22 And no one pours new wine into old wineskins; otherwise, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins will be destroyed. Instead new wine is poured into new wineskins.”
MAR 2:23 Jesus was going through the grain fields on a Sabbath, and his disciples began to pick some heads of wheat as they made their way.
MAR 2:24 So the Pharisees said to him, “Look, why are they doing what is against the law on the Sabbath?”
MAR 2:25 He said to them, “Have you never read what David did when he was in need and he and his companions were hungry –
MAR 2:26 how he entered the house of God when Abiathar was high priest and ate the sacred bread, which is against the law for any but the priests to eat, and also gave it to his companions?”
MAR 2:27 Then he said to them, “The Sabbath was made for people, not people for the Sabbath.
MAR 2:28 For this reason the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.”
MAR 3:1 Then Jesus entered the synagogue again, and a man was there who had a withered hand.
MAR 3:2 They watched Jesus closely to see if he would heal him on the Sabbath, so that they could accuse him.
MAR 3:3 So he said to the man who had the withered hand, “Stand up among all these people.”
MAR 3:4 Then he said to them, “Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath, or evil, to save a life or destroy it?” But they were silent.
MAR 3:5 After looking around at them in anger, grieved by the hardness of their hearts, he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out, and his hand was restored.
MAR 3:6 So the Pharisees went out immediately and began plotting with the Herodians, as to how they could assassinate him.
MAR 3:7 Then Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, and a great multitude from Galilee followed him. And from Judea,
MAR 3:8 Jerusalem, a great multitude came to him when they heard about the things he had done.
MAR 3:9 Because of the crowd, he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him so the crowd would not press toward him.
MAR 3:10 For he had healed many, so that all who were afflicted with diseases pressed toward him in order to touch him.
MAR 3:11 And whenever the unclean spirits saw him, they fell down before him and cried out, “You are the Son of God.”
MAR 3:12 But he sternly ordered them not to make him known.
MAR 3:13 Now Jesus went up the mountain and called for those he wanted, and they came to him.
MAR 3:14 He appointed twelve (whom he named apostles ), so that they would be with him and he could send them to preach
MAR 3:15 and to have authority to cast out demons.
MAR 3:16 He appointed twelve: To Simon he gave the name Peter;
MAR 3:17 to James and his brother John, the sons of Zebedee, he gave the name Boanerges (that is, “sons of thunder”);
MAR 3:18 and Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot,
MAR 3:19 and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
MAR 3:20 Now Jesus went home, and a crowd gathered so that they were not able to eat.
MAR 3:21 When his family heard this they went out to restrain him, for they said, “He is out of his mind.”
MAR 3:22 The experts in the law who came down from Jerusalem said, “He is possessed by Beelzebul,” and, “By the ruler of demons he casts out demons.”
MAR 3:23 So he called them and spoke to them in parables: “How can Satan cast out Satan?
MAR 3:24 If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom will not be able to stand.
MAR 3:25 If a house is divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand.
MAR 3:26 And if Satan rises against himself and is divided, he is not able to stand and his end has come.
MAR 3:27 But no one is able to enter a strong man’s house and steal his property unless he first ties up the strong man. Then he can thoroughly plunder his house.
MAR 3:28 I tell you the truth, people will be forgiven for all sins, even all the blasphemies they utter.
MAR 3:29 But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven, but is guilty of an eternal sin”
MAR 3:30 (because they said, “He has an unclean spirit” ).
MAR 3:31 Then Jesus’ mother and his brothers came. Standing outside, they sent word to him, to summon him.
MAR 3:32 A crowd was sitting around him and they said to him, “Look, your mother and your brothers are outside looking for you.”
MAR 3:33 He answered them and said, “Who are my mother and my brothers?”
MAR 3:34 And looking at those who were sitting around him in a circle, he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers!
MAR 3:35 For whoever does the will of God is my brother and sister and mother.”
MAR 4:1 Again he began to teach by the lake. Such a large crowd gathered around him that he got into a boat on the lake and sat there while the whole crowd was on the shore by the lake.
MAR 4:2 He taught them many things in parables, and in his teaching said to them:
MAR 4:3 “Listen! A sower went out to sow.
MAR 4:4 And as he sowed, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it.
MAR 4:5 Other seed fell on rocky ground where it did not have much soil. It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep.
MAR 4:6 When the sun came up it was scorched, and because it did not have sufficient root, it withered.
MAR 4:7 Other seed fell among the thorns, and they grew up and choked it, and it did not produce grain.
MAR 4:8 But other seed fell on good soil and produced grain, sprouting and growing; some yielded thirty times as much, some sixty, and some a hundred times.”
MAR 4:9 And he said, “Whoever has ears to hear had better listen!”
MAR 4:10 When he was alone, those around him with the twelve asked him about the parables.
MAR 4:11 He said to them, “The secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you. But to those outside, everything is in parables,
MAR 4:12 so that although they look they may look but not see, and although they hear they may hear but not understand, so they may not repent and be forgiven.”
MAR 4:13 He said to them, “Don’t you understand this parable? Then how will you understand any parable?
MAR 4:14 The sower sows the word.
MAR 4:15 These are the ones on the path where the word is sown: Whenever they hear, immediately Satan comes and snatches the word that was sown in them.
MAR 4:16 These are the ones sown on rocky ground: As soon as they hear the word, they receive it with joy.
MAR 4:17 But they have no root in themselves and do not endure. Then, when trouble or persecution comes because of the word, immediately they fall away.
MAR 4:18 Others are the ones sown among thorns: They are those who hear the word,
MAR 4:19 but worldly cares, the seductiveness of wealth, and the desire for other things come in and choke the word, and it produces nothing.
MAR 4:20 But these are the ones sown on good soil: They hear the word and receive it and bear fruit, one thirty times as much, one sixty, and one a hundred.”
MAR 4:21 He also said to them, “A lamp isn’t brought to be put under a basket or under a bed, is it? Isn’t it to be placed on a lampstand?
MAR 4:22 For nothing is hidden except to be revealed, and nothing concealed except to be brought to light.
MAR 4:23 If anyone has ears to hear, he had better listen!”
MAR 4:24 And he said to them, “Take care about what you hear. The measure you use will be the measure you receive, and more will be added to you.
MAR 4:25 For whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.”
MAR 4:26 He also said, “The kingdom of God is like someone who spreads seed on the ground.
MAR 4:27 He goes to sleep and gets up, night and day, and the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.
MAR 4:28 By itself the soil produces a crop, first the stalk, then the head, then the full grain in the head.
MAR 4:29 And when the grain is ripe, he sends in the sickle because the harvest has come.”
MAR 4:30 He also asked, “To what can we compare the kingdom of God, or what parable can we use to present it?
MAR 4:31 It is like a mustard seed that when sown in the ground, even though it is the smallest of all the seeds in the ground –
MAR 4:32 when it is sown, it grows up, becomes the greatest of all garden plants, and grows large branches so that the wild birds can nest in its shade.”
MAR 4:33 So with many parables like these, he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear.
MAR 4:34 He did not speak to them without a parable. But privately he explained everything to his own disciples.
MAR 4:35 On that day, when evening came, Jesus said to his disciples, “Let’s go across to the other side of the lake.”
MAR 4:36 So after leaving the crowd, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat, and other boats were with him.
MAR 4:37 Now a great windstorm developed and the waves were breaking into the boat, so that the boat was nearly swamped.
MAR 4:38 But he was in the stern, sleeping on a cushion. They woke him up and said to him, “Teacher, don’t you care that we are about to die?”
MAR 4:39 So he got up and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “Be quiet! Calm down!” Then the wind stopped, and it was dead calm.
MAR 4:40 And he said to them, “Why are you cowardly? Do you still not have faith?”
MAR 4:41 They were overwhelmed by fear and said to one another, “Who then is this? Even the wind and sea obey him!”
MAR 5:1 So they came to the other side of the lake, to the region of the Gerasenes.
MAR 5:2 Just as Jesus was getting out of the boat, a man with an unclean spirit came from the tombs and met him.
MAR 5:3 He lived among the tombs, and no one could bind him anymore, not even with a chain.
MAR 5:4 For his hands and feet had often been bound with chains and shackles, but he had torn the chains apart and broken the shackles in pieces. No one was strong enough to subdue him.
MAR 5:5 Each night and every day among the tombs and in the mountains, he would cry out and cut himself with stones.
MAR 5:6 When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed down before him.
MAR 5:7 Then he cried out with a loud voice, “Leave me alone, Jesus, Son of the Most High God! I implore you by God – do not torment me!”
MAR 5:8 (For Jesus had said to him, “Come out of that man, you unclean spirit!”)
MAR 5:9 Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “My name is Legion, for we are many.”
MAR 5:10 He begged Jesus repeatedly not to send them out of the region.
MAR 5:11 There on the hillside, a great herd of pigs was feeding.
MAR 5:12 And the demonic spirits begged him, “Send us into the pigs. Let us enter them.”
MAR 5:13 Jesus gave them permission. So the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs. Then the herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake, and about two thousand were drowned in the lake.
MAR 5:14 Now the herdsmen ran off and spread the news in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened.
MAR 5:15 They came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man sitting there, clothed and in his right mind – the one who had the “Legion” – and they were afraid.
MAR 5:16 Those who had seen what had happened to the demon-possessed man reported it, and they also told about the pigs.
MAR 5:17 Then they asked Jesus to leave their region.
MAR 5:18 As he was getting into the boat the man who had been demon-possessed asked if he could go with him.
MAR 5:19 But Jesus did not permit him to do so. Instead, he said to him, “Go to your home and to your people and tell them what the Lord has done for you, that he had mercy on you.”
MAR 5:20 So he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis what Jesus had done for him, and all were amazed.
MAR 5:21 When Jesus had crossed again in a boat to the other side, a large crowd gathered around him, and he was by the sea.
MAR 5:22 Then one of the synagogue rulers, named Jairus, came up, and when he saw Jesus, he fell at his feet.
MAR 5:23 He asked him urgently, “My little daughter is near death. Come and lay your hands on her so that she may be healed and live.”
MAR 5:24 Jesus went with him, and a large crowd followed and pressed around him.
MAR 5:25 Now a woman was there who had been suffering from a hemorrhage for twelve years.
MAR 5:26 She had endured a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all that she had. Yet instead of getting better, she grew worse.
MAR 5:27 When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak,
MAR 5:28 for she kept saying, “If only I touch his clothes, I will be healed.”
MAR 5:29 At once the bleeding stopped, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her disease.
MAR 5:30 Jesus knew at once that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the crowd and said, “Who touched my clothes?”
MAR 5:31 His disciples said to him, “You see the crowd pressing against you and you say, ‘Who touched me?’”
MAR 5:32 But he looked around to see who had done it.
MAR 5:33 Then the woman, with fear and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth.
MAR 5:34 He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be healed of your disease.”
MAR 5:35 While he was still speaking, people came from the synagogue ruler’s house saying, “Your daughter has died. Why trouble the teacher any longer?”
MAR 5:36 But Jesus, paying no attention to what was said, told the synagogue ruler, “Do not be afraid; just believe.”
MAR 5:37 He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James.
MAR 5:38 They came to the house of the synagogue ruler where he saw noisy confusion and people weeping and wailing loudly.
MAR 5:39 When he entered he said to them, “Why are you distressed and weeping? The child is not dead but asleep.”
MAR 5:40 And they began making fun of him. But he put them all outside and he took the child’s father and mother and his own companions and went into the room where the child was.
MAR 5:41 Then, gently taking the child by the hand, he said to her, “ Talitha koum,” which means, “Little girl, I say to you, get up.”
MAR 5:42 The girl got up at once and began to walk around (she was twelve years old). They were completely astonished at this.
MAR 5:43 He strictly ordered that no one should know about this, and told them to give her something to eat.
MAR 6:1 Now Jesus left that place and came to his hometown, and his disciples followed him.
MAR 6:2 When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue. Many who heard him were astonished, saying, “Where did he get these ideas? And what is this wisdom that has been given to him? What are these miracles that are done through his hands?
MAR 6:3 Isn’t this the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James, Joses, Judas, and Simon? And aren’t his sisters here with us?” And so they took offense at him.
MAR 6:4 Then Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown, and among his relatives, and in his own house.”
MAR 6:5 He was not able to do a miracle there, except to lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them.
MAR 6:6 And he was amazed because of their unbelief. Then he went around among the villages and taught.
MAR 6:7 Jesus called the twelve and began to send them out two by two. He gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
MAR 6:8 He instructed them to take nothing for the journey except a staff – no bread, no bag, no money in their belts –
MAR 6:9 and to put on sandals but not to wear two tunics.
MAR 6:10 He said to them, “Wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave the area.
MAR 6:11 If a place will not welcome you or listen to you, as you go out from there, shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
MAR 6:12 So they went out and preached that all should repent.
MAR 6:13 They cast out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them.
MAR 6:14 Now King Herod heard this, for Jesus’ name had become known. Some were saying, “John the baptizer has been raised from the dead, and because of this, miraculous powers are at work in him.”
MAR 6:15 Others said, “He is Elijah.” Others said, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets from the past.”
MAR 6:16 But when Herod heard this, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has been raised!”
MAR 6:17 For Herod himself had sent men, arrested John, and bound him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, because Herod had married her.
MAR 6:18 For John had repeatedly told Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”
MAR 6:19 So Herodias nursed a grudge against him and wanted to kill him. But she could not
MAR 6:20 because Herod stood in awe of John and protected him, since he knew that John was a righteous and holy man. When Herod heard him, he was thoroughly baffled, and yet he liked to listen to John.
MAR 6:21 But a suitable day came, when Herod gave a banquet on his birthday for his court officials, military commanders, and leaders of Galilee.
MAR 6:22 When his daughter Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his dinner guests. The king said to the girl, “Ask me for whatever you want and I will give it to you.”
MAR 6:23 He swore to her, “Whatever you ask I will give you, up to half my kingdom.”
MAR 6:24 So she went out and said to her mother, “What should I ask for?” Her mother said, “The head of John the baptizer.”
MAR 6:25 Immediately she hurried back to the king and made her request: “I want the head of John the Baptist on a platter immediately.”
MAR 6:26 Although it grieved the king deeply, he did not want to reject her request because of his oath and his guests.
MAR 6:27 So the king sent an executioner at once to bring John’s head, and he went and beheaded John in prison.
MAR 6:28 He brought his head on a platter and gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
MAR 6:29 When John’s disciples heard this, they came and took his body and placed it in a tomb.
MAR 6:30 Then the apostles gathered around Jesus and told him everything they had done and taught.
MAR 6:31 He said to them, “Come with me privately to an isolated place and rest a while” (for many were coming and going, and there was no time to eat).
MAR 6:32 So they went away by themselves in a boat to some remote place.
MAR 6:33 But many saw them leaving and recognized them, and they hurried on foot from all the towns and arrived there ahead of them.
MAR 6:34 As Jesus came ashore he saw the large crowd and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. So he taught them many things.
MAR 6:35 When it was already late, his disciples came to him and said, “This is an isolated place and it is already very late.
MAR 6:36 Send them away so that they can go into the surrounding countryside and villages and buy something for themselves to eat.”
MAR 6:37 But he answered them, “You give them something to eat.” And they said, “Should we go and buy bread for two hundred silver coins and give it to them to eat?”
MAR 6:38 He said to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” When they found out, they said, “Five – and two fish.”
MAR 6:39 Then he directed them all to sit down in groups on the green grass.
MAR 6:40 So they reclined in groups of hundreds and fifties.
MAR 6:41 He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. He gave them to his disciples to serve the people, and he divided the two fish among them all.
MAR 6:42 They all ate and were satisfied,
MAR 6:43 and they picked up the broken pieces and fish that were left over, twelve baskets full.
MAR 6:44 Now there were five thousand men who ate the bread.
MAR 6:45 Immediately Jesus made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he dispersed the crowd.
MAR 6:46 After saying good-bye to them, he went to the mountain to pray.
MAR 6:47 When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea and he was alone on the land.
MAR 6:48 He saw them straining at the oars, because the wind was against them. As the night was ending, he came to them walking on the sea, for he wanted to pass by them.
MAR 6:49 When they saw him walking on the water they thought he was a ghost. They cried out,
MAR 6:50 for they all saw him and were terrified. But immediately he spoke to them: “Have courage! It is I. Do not be afraid.”
MAR 6:51 Then he went up with them into the boat, and the wind ceased. They were completely astonished,
MAR 6:52 because they did not understand about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened.
MAR 6:53 After they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret and anchored there.
MAR 6:54 As they got out of the boat, people immediately recognized Jesus.
MAR 6:55 They ran through that whole region and began to bring the sick on mats to wherever he was rumored to be.
MAR 6:56 And wherever he would go – into villages, towns, or countryside – they would place the sick in the marketplaces, and would ask him if they could just touch the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed.
MAR 7:1 Now the Pharisees and some of the experts in the law who came from Jerusalem gathered around him.
MAR 7:2 And they saw that some of Jesus’ disciples ate their bread with unclean hands, that is, unwashed.
MAR 7:3 (For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they perform a ritual washing, holding fast to the tradition of the elders.
MAR 7:4 And when they come from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they wash. They hold fast to many other traditions: the washing of cups, pots, kettles, and dining couches. )
MAR 7:5 The Pharisees and the experts in the law asked him, “Why do your disciples not live according to the tradition of the elders, but eat with unwashed hands?”
MAR 7:6 He said to them, “Isaiah prophesied correctly about you hypocrites, as it is written: ‘ This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
MAR 7:7 They worship me in vain, teaching as doctrine the commandments of men.’
MAR 7:8 Having no regard for the command of God, you hold fast to human tradition.”
MAR 7:9 He also said to them, “You neatly reject the commandment of God in order to set up your tradition.
MAR 7:10 For Moses said, ‘ Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘ Whoever insults his father or mother must be put to death.’
MAR 7:11 But you say that if anyone tells his father or mother, ‘Whatever help you would have received from me is corban’ (that is, a gift for God),
MAR 7:12 then you no longer permit him to do anything for his father or mother.
MAR 7:13 Thus you nullify the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many things like this.”
MAR 7:14 Then he called the crowd again and said to them, “Listen to me, everyone, and understand.
MAR 7:15 There is nothing outside of a person that can defile him by going into him. Rather, it is what comes out of a person that defiles him.”
MAR 7:16 
MAR 7:17 Now when Jesus had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about the parable.
MAR 7:18 He said to them, “Are you so foolish? Don’t you understand that whatever goes into a person from outside cannot defile him?
MAR 7:19 For it does not enter his heart but his stomach, and then goes out into the sewer.” (This means all foods are clean.)
MAR 7:20 He said, “What comes out of a person defiles him.
MAR 7:21 For from within, out of the human heart, come evil ideas, sexual immorality, theft, murder,
MAR 7:22 adultery, greed, evil, deceit, debauchery, envy, slander, pride, and folly.
MAR 7:23 All these evils come from within and defile a person.”
MAR 7:24 After Jesus left there, he went to the region of Tyre. When he went into a house, he did not want anyone to know, but he was not able to escape notice.
MAR 7:25 Instead, a woman whose young daughter had an unclean spirit immediately heard about him and came and fell at his feet.
MAR 7:26 The woman was a Greek, of Syrophoenician origin. She asked him to cast the demon out of her daughter.
MAR 7:27 He said to her, “Let the children be satisfied first, for it is not right to take the children’s bread and to throw it to the dogs.”
MAR 7:28 She answered, “Yes, Lord, but even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.”
MAR 7:29 Then he said to her, “Because you said this, you may go. The demon has left your daughter.”
MAR 7:30 She went home and found the child lying on the bed, and the demon gone.
MAR 7:31 Then Jesus went out again from the region of Tyre to the Sea of Galilee in the region of the Decapolis.
MAR 7:32 They brought to him a deaf man who had difficulty speaking, and they asked him to place his hands on him.
MAR 7:33 After Jesus took him aside privately, away from the crowd, he put his fingers in the man’s ears, and after spitting, he touched his tongue.
MAR 7:34 Then he looked up to heaven and said with a sigh, “ Ephphatha” (that is, “Be opened”).
MAR 7:35 And immediately the man’s ears were opened, his tongue loosened, and he spoke plainly.
MAR 7:36 Jesus ordered them not to tell anything. But as much as he ordered them not to do this, they proclaimed it all the more.
MAR 7:37 People were completely astounded and said, “He has done everything well. He even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak.”
MAR 8:1 In those days there was another large crowd with nothing to eat. So Jesus called his disciples and said to them,
MAR 8:2 “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have already been here with me three days, and they have nothing to eat.
MAR 8:3 If I send them home hungry, they will faint on the way, and some of them have come from a great distance.”
MAR 8:4 His disciples answered him, “Where can someone get enough bread in this desolate place to satisfy these people?”
MAR 8:5 He asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven.”
MAR 8:6 Then he directed the crowd to sit down on the ground. After he took the seven loaves and gave thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples to serve. So they served the crowd.
MAR 8:7 They also had a few small fish. After giving thanks for these, he told them to serve these as well.
MAR 8:8 Everyone ate and was satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full.
MAR 8:9 There were about four thousand who ate. Then he dismissed them.
MAR 8:10 Immediately he got into a boat with his disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha.
MAR 8:11 Then the Pharisees came and began to argue with Jesus, asking for a sign from heaven to test him.
MAR 8:12 Sighing deeply in his spirit he said, “Why does this generation look for a sign? I tell you the truth, no sign will be given to this generation.”
MAR 8:13 Then he left them, got back into the boat, and went to the other side.
MAR 8:14 Now they had forgotten to take bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat.
MAR 8:15 And Jesus ordered them, “Watch out! Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod!”
MAR 8:16 So they began to discuss with one another about having no bread.
MAR 8:17 When he learned of this, Jesus said to them, “Why are you arguing about having no bread? Do you still not see or understand? Have your hearts been hardened?
MAR 8:18 Though you have eyes, don’t you see? And though you have ears, can’t you hear? Don’t you remember?
MAR 8:19 When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of pieces did you pick up?” They replied, “Twelve.”
MAR 8:20 “When I broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many baskets full of pieces did you pick up?” They replied, “Seven.”
MAR 8:21 Then he said to them, “Do you still not understand?”
MAR 8:22 Then they came to Bethsaida. They brought a blind man to Jesus and asked him to touch him.
MAR 8:23 He took the blind man by the hand and brought him outside of the village. Then he spit on his eyes, placed his hands on his eyes and asked, “Do you see anything?”
MAR 8:24 Regaining his sight he said, “I see people, but they look like trees walking.”
MAR 8:25 Then Jesus placed his hands on the man’s eyes again. And he opened his eyes, his sight was restored, and he saw everything clearly.
MAR 8:26 Jesus sent him home, saying, “Do not even go into the village.”
MAR 8:27 Then Jesus and his disciples went to the villages of Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?”
MAR 8:28 They said, “John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and still others, one of the prophets.”
MAR 8:29 He asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered him, “You are the Christ.”
MAR 8:30 Then he warned them not to tell anyone about him.
MAR 8:31 Then Jesus began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and experts in the law, and be killed, and after three days rise again.
MAR 8:32 He spoke openly about this. So Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
MAR 8:33 But after turning and looking at his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind me, Satan. You are not setting your mind on God’s interests, but on man’s.”
MAR 8:34 Then Jesus called the crowd, along with his disciples, and said to them, “If anyone wants to become my follower, he must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
MAR 8:35 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and for the gospel will save it.
MAR 8:36 For what benefit is it for a person to gain the whole world, yet forfeit his life?
MAR 8:37 What can a person give in exchange for his life?
MAR 8:38 For if anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will also be ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.”
MAR 9:1 And he said to them, “I tell you the truth, there are some standing here who will not experience death before they see the kingdom of God come with power.”
MAR 9:2 Six days later Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John and led them alone up a high mountain privately. And he was transfigured before them,
MAR 9:3 and his clothes became radiantly white, more so than any launderer in the world could bleach them.
MAR 9:4 Then Elijah appeared before them along with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.
MAR 9:5 So Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three shelters – one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
MAR 9:6 (For they were afraid, and he did not know what to say.)
MAR 9:7 Then a cloud overshadowed them, and a voice came from the cloud, “This is my one dear Son. Listen to him!”
MAR 9:8 Suddenly when they looked around, they saw no one with them any more except Jesus.
MAR 9:9 As they were coming down from the mountain, he gave them orders not to tell anyone what they had seen until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
MAR 9:10 They kept this statement to themselves, discussing what this rising from the dead meant.
MAR 9:11 Then they asked him, “Why do the experts in the law say that Elijah must come first?”
MAR 9:12 He said to them, “Elijah does indeed come first, and restores all things. And why is it written that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be despised?
MAR 9:13 But I tell you that Elijah has certainly come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.”
MAR 9:14 When they came to the disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and experts in the law arguing with them.
MAR 9:15 When the whole crowd saw him, they were amazed and ran at once and greeted him.
MAR 9:16 He asked them, “What are you arguing about with them?”
MAR 9:17 A member of the crowd said to him, “Teacher, I brought you my son, who is possessed by a spirit that makes him mute.
MAR 9:18 Whenever it seizes him, it throws him down, and he foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked your disciples to cast it out, but they were not able to do so.”
MAR 9:19 He answered them, “You unbelieving generation! How much longer must I be with you? How much longer must I endure you? Bring him to me.”
MAR 9:20 So they brought the boy to him. When the spirit saw him, it immediately threw the boy into a convulsion. He fell on the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth.
MAR 9:21 Jesus asked his father, “How long has this been happening to him?” And he said, “From childhood.
MAR 9:22 It has often thrown him into fire or water to destroy him. But if you are able to do anything, have compassion on us and help us.”
MAR 9:23 Then Jesus said to him, “‘If you are able?’ All things are possible for the one who believes.”
MAR 9:24 Immediately the father of the boy cried out and said, “I believe; help my unbelief!”
MAR 9:25 Now when Jesus saw that a crowd was quickly gathering, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, “Mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him and never enter him again.”
MAR 9:26 It shrieked, threw him into terrible convulsions, and came out. The boy looked so much like a corpse that many said, “He is dead!”
MAR 9:27 But Jesus gently took his hand and raised him to his feet, and he stood up.
MAR 9:28 Then, after he went into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?”
MAR 9:29 He told them, “This kind can come out only by prayer.”
MAR 9:30 They went out from there and passed through Galilee. But Jesus did not want anyone to know,
MAR 9:31 for he was teaching his disciples and telling them, “The Son of Man will be betrayed into the hands of men. They will kill him, and after three days he will rise.”
MAR 9:32 But they did not understand this statement and were afraid to ask him.
MAR 9:33 Then they came to Capernaum. After Jesus was inside the house he asked them, “What were you discussing on the way?”
MAR 9:34 But they were silent, for on the way they had argued with one another about who was the greatest.
MAR 9:35 After he sat down, he called the twelve and said to them, “If anyone wants to be first, he must be last of all and servant of all.”
MAR 9:36 He took a little child and had him stand among them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them,
MAR 9:37 “Whoever welcomes one of these little children in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me does not welcome me but the one who sent me.”
MAR 9:38 John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we tried to stop him because he was not following us.”
MAR 9:39 But Jesus said, “Do not stop him, because no one who does a miracle in my name will be able soon afterward to say anything bad about me.
MAR 9:40 For whoever is not against us is for us.
MAR 9:41 For I tell you the truth, whoever gives you a cup of water because you bear Christ’s name will never lose his reward.
MAR 9:42 “If anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a huge millstone tied around his neck and to be thrown into the sea.
MAR 9:43 If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off! It is better for you to enter into life crippled than to have two hands and go into hell, to the unquenchable fire.
MAR 9:44 
MAR 9:45 If your foot causes you to sin, cut it off! It is better to enter life lame than to have two feet and be thrown into hell.
MAR 9:46 
MAR 9:47 If your eye causes you to sin, tear it out! It is better to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into hell,
MAR 9:48 where their worm never dies and the fire is never quenched.
MAR 9:49 Everyone will be salted with fire.
MAR 9:50 Salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, how can you make it salty again? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with each other.”
MAR 10:1 Then Jesus left that place and went to the region of Judea and beyond the Jordan River. Again crowds gathered to him, and again, as was his custom, he taught them.
MAR 10:2 Then some Pharisees came, and to test him they asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?”
MAR 10:3 He answered them, “What did Moses command you?”
MAR 10:4 They said, “Moses permitted a man to write a certificate of dismissal and to divorce her.”
MAR 10:5 But Jesus said to them, “He wrote this commandment for you because of your hard hearts.
MAR 10:6 But from the beginning of creation he made them male and female*.
MAR 10:7 For this reason a man will leave his father and mother,
MAR 10:8 and the two will become one flesh. So they are no longer two, but one flesh.
MAR 10:9 Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
MAR 10:10 In the house once again, the disciples asked him about this.
MAR 10:11 So he told them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her.
MAR 10:12 And if she divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.”
MAR 10:13 Now people were bringing little children to him for him to touch, but the disciples scolded those who brought them.
MAR 10:14 But when Jesus saw this, he was indignant and said to them, “Let the little children come to me and do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
MAR 10:15 I tell you the truth, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child will never enter it.”
MAR 10:16 After he took the children in his arms, he placed his hands on them and blessed them.
MAR 10:17 Now as Jesus was starting out on his way, someone ran up to him, fell on his knees, and said, “Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
MAR 10:18 Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone.
MAR 10:19 You know the commandments: ‘ Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony, do not defraud , honor your father and mother.’”
MAR 10:20 The man said to him, “Teacher, I have wholeheartedly obeyed all these laws since my youth.”
MAR 10:21 As Jesus looked at him, he felt love for him and said, “You lack one thing. Go, sell whatever you have and give the money to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”
MAR 10:22 But at this statement, the man looked sad and went away sorrowful, for he was very rich.
MAR 10:23 Then Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!”
MAR 10:24 The disciples were astonished at these words. But again Jesus said to them, “Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God!
MAR 10:25 It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”
MAR 10:26 They were even more astonished and said to one another, “Then who can be saved?”
MAR 10:27 Jesus looked at them and replied, “This is impossible for mere humans, but not for God; all things are possible for God.”
MAR 10:28 Peter began to speak to him, “Look, we have left everything to follow you!”
MAR 10:29 Jesus said, “I tell you the truth, there is no one who has left home or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for my sake and for the sake of the gospel
MAR 10:30 who will not receive in this age a hundred times as much – homes, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, fields, all with persecutions – and in the age to come, eternal life.
MAR 10:31 But many who are first will be last, and the last first.”
MAR 10:32 They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem. Jesus was going ahead of them, and they were amazed, but those who followed were afraid. He took the twelve aside again and began to tell them what was going to happen to him.
MAR 10:33 “Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and experts in the law. They will condemn him to death and will turn him over to the Gentiles.
MAR 10:34 They will mock him, spit on him, flog him severely, and kill him. Yet after three days, he will rise again.”
MAR 10:35 Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to him and said, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask.”
MAR 10:36 He said to them, “What do you want me to do for you?”
MAR 10:37 They said to him, “Permit one of us to sit at your right hand and the other at your left in your glory.”
MAR 10:38 But Jesus said to them, “You don’t know what you are asking! Are you able to drink the cup I drink or be baptized with the baptism I experience?”
MAR 10:39 They said to him, “We are able.” Then Jesus said to them, “You will drink the cup I drink, and you will be baptized with the baptism I experience,
MAR 10:40 but to sit at my right or at my left is not mine to give. It is for those for whom it has been prepared.”
MAR 10:41 Now when the other ten heard this, they became angry with James and John.
MAR 10:42 Jesus called them and said to them, “You know that those who are recognized as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those in high positions use their authority over them.
MAR 10:43 But it is not this way among you. Instead whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant,
MAR 10:44 and whoever wants to be first among you must be the slave of all.
MAR 10:45 For even the Son of Man did not come to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
MAR 10:46 They came to Jericho. As Jesus and his disciples and a large crowd were leaving Jericho, Bartimaeus the son of Timaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the road.
MAR 10:47 When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to shout, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
MAR 10:48 Many scolded him to get him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
MAR 10:49 Jesus stopped and said, “Call him.” So they called the blind man and said to him, “Have courage! Get up! He is calling you.”
MAR 10:50 He threw off his cloak, jumped up, and came to Jesus.
MAR 10:51 Then Jesus said to him, “What do you want me to do for you?” The blind man replied, “Rabbi, let me see again.”
MAR 10:52 Jesus said to him, “Go, your faith has healed you.” Immediately he regained his sight and followed him on the road.
MAR 11:1 Now as they approached Jerusalem, near Bethphage and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples
MAR 11:2 and said to them, “Go to the village ahead of you. As soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there that has never been ridden. Untie it and bring it here.
MAR 11:3 If anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it and will send it back here soon.’”
MAR 11:4 So they went and found a colt tied at a door, outside in the street, and untied it.
MAR 11:5 Some people standing there said to them, “What are you doing, untying that colt?”
MAR 11:6 They replied as Jesus had told them, and the bystanders let them go.
MAR 11:7 Then they brought the colt to Jesus, threw their cloaks on it, and he sat on it.
MAR 11:8 Many spread their cloaks on the road and others spread branches they had cut in the fields.
MAR 11:9 Both those who went ahead and those who followed kept shouting, “ Hosanna! Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!*
MAR 11:10 Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! Hosanna in the highest!”
MAR 11:11 Then Jesus entered Jerusalem and went to the temple. And after looking around at everything, he went out to Bethany with the twelve since it was already late.
MAR 11:12 Now the next day, as they went out from Bethany, he was hungry.
MAR 11:13 After noticing in the distance a fig tree with leaves, he went to see if he could find any fruit on it. When he came to it he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.
MAR 11:14 He said to it, “May no one ever eat fruit from you again.” And his disciples heard it.
MAR 11:15 Then they came to Jerusalem. Jesus entered the temple area and began to drive out those who were selling and buying in the temple courts. He turned over the tables of the money changers and the chairs of those selling doves,
MAR 11:16 and he would not permit anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts.
MAR 11:17 Then he began to teach them and said, “Is it not written: ‘ My house will be called a house of prayer for all nations’? But you have turned it into a den of robbers!”
MAR 11:18 The chief priests and the experts in the law heard it and they considered how they could assassinate him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed by his teaching.
MAR 11:19 When evening came, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.
MAR 11:20 In the morning as they passed by, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots.
MAR 11:21 Peter remembered and said to him, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree you cursed has withered.”
MAR 11:22 Jesus said to them, “Have faith in God.
MAR 11:23 I tell you the truth, if someone says to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him.
MAR 11:24 For this reason I tell you, whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.
MAR 11:25 Whenever you stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your Father in heaven will also forgive you your sins.”
MAR 11:26 
MAR 11:27 They came again to Jerusalem. While Jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the experts in the law, and the elders came up to him
MAR 11:28 and said, “By what authority are you doing these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?”
MAR 11:29 Jesus said to them, “I will ask you one question. Answer me and I will tell you by what authority I do these things:
MAR 11:30 John’s baptism – was it from heaven or from people? Answer me.”
MAR 11:31 They discussed with one another, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’
MAR 11:32 But if we say, ‘From people – ’” (they feared the crowd, for they all considered John to be truly a prophet).
MAR 11:33 So they answered Jesus, “We don’t know.” Then Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
MAR 12:1 Then he began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard. He put a fence around it, dug a pit for its winepress, and built a watchtower. Then he leased it to tenant farmers and went on a journey.
MAR 12:2 At harvest time he sent a slave to the tenants to collect from them his portion of the crop.
MAR 12:3 But those tenants seized his slave, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
MAR 12:4 So he sent another slave to them again. This one they struck on the head and treated outrageously.
MAR 12:5 He sent another, and that one they killed. This happened to many others, some of whom were beaten, others killed.
MAR 12:6 He had one left, his one dear son. Finally he sent him to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
MAR 12:7 But those tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him and the inheritance will be ours!’
MAR 12:8 So they seized him, killed him, and threw his body out of the vineyard.
MAR 12:9 What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others.
MAR 12:10 Have you not read this scripture: ‘ The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone.
MAR 12:11 This is from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
MAR 12:12 Now they wanted to arrest him (but they feared the crowd), because they realized that he told this parable against them. So they left him and went away.
MAR 12:13 Then they sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to trap him with his own words.
MAR 12:14 When they came they said to him, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful and do not court anyone’s favor, because you show no partiality but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not? Should we pay or shouldn’t we?”
MAR 12:15 But he saw through their hypocrisy and said to them, “Why are you testing me? Bring me a denarius and let me look at it.”
MAR 12:16 So they brought one, and he said to them, “Whose image is this, and whose inscription?” They replied, “Caesar’s.”
MAR 12:17 Then Jesus said to them, “Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” And they were utterly amazed at him.
MAR 12:18 Sadducees (who say there is no resurrection) also came to him and asked him,
MAR 12:19 “Teacher, Moses wrote for us: ‘ If a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, that man must marry the widow and father children for his brother.’
MAR 12:20 There were seven brothers. The first one married, and when he died he had no children.
MAR 12:21 The second married her and died without any children, and likewise the third.
MAR 12:22 None of the seven had children. Finally, the woman died too.
MAR 12:23 In the resurrection, when they rise again, whose wife will she be? For all seven had married her.”
MAR 12:24 Jesus said to them, “Aren’t you deceived for this reason, because you don’t know the scriptures or the power of God?
MAR 12:25 For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.
MAR 12:26 Now as for the dead being raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the bush, how God said to him, ‘ I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?
MAR 12:27 He is not the God of the dead but of the living. You are badly mistaken!”
MAR 12:28 Now one of the experts in the law came and heard them debating. When he saw that Jesus answered them well, he asked him, “Which commandment is the most important of all?”
MAR 12:29 Jesus answered, “The most important is: ‘ Listen, Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.
MAR 12:30 Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.’
MAR 12:31 The second is: ‘ Love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
MAR 12:32 The expert in the law said to him, “That is true, Teacher; you are right to say that he is one, and there is no one else besides him.
MAR 12:33 And to love him with all your heart, with all your mind, and with all your strength and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
MAR 12:34 When Jesus saw that he had answered thoughtfully, he said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” Then no one dared any longer to question him.
MAR 12:35 While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he said, “How is it that the experts in the law say that the Christ is David’s son?
MAR 12:36 David himself, by the Holy Spirit, said, ‘ The Lord said to my lord, “ Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies under your feet.”’
MAR 12:37 If David himself calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?” And the large crowd was listening to him with delight.
MAR 12:38 In his teaching Jesus also said, “Watch out for the experts in the law. They like walking around in long robes and elaborate greetings in the marketplaces,
MAR 12:39 and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
MAR 12:40 They devour widows’ property, and as a show make long prayers. These men will receive a more severe punishment.”
MAR 12:41 Then he sat down opposite the offering box, and watched the crowd putting coins into it. Many rich people were throwing in large amounts.
MAR 12:42 And a poor widow came and put in two small copper coins, worth less than a penny.
MAR 12:43 He called his disciples and said to them, “I tell you the truth, this poor widow has put more into the offering box than all the others.
MAR 12:44 For they all gave out of their wealth. But she, out of her poverty, put in what she had to live on, everything she had.”
MAR 13:1 Now as Jesus was going out of the temple courts, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, look at these tremendous stones and buildings!”
MAR 13:2 Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? Not one stone will be left on another. All will be torn down!”
MAR 13:3 So while he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately,
MAR 13:4 “Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that all these things are about to take place?”
MAR 13:5 Jesus began to say to them, “Watch out that no one misleads you.
MAR 13:6 Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and they will mislead many.
MAR 13:7 When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. These things must happen, but the end is still to come.
MAR 13:8 For nation will rise up in arms against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places, and there will be famines. These are but the beginning of birth pains.
MAR 13:9 “You must watch out for yourselves. You will be handed over to councils and beaten in the synagogues. You will stand before governors and kings because of me, as a witness to them.
MAR 13:10 First the gospel must be preached to all nations.
MAR 13:11 When they arrest you and hand you over for trial, do not worry about what to speak. But say whatever is given you at that time, for it is not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
MAR 13:12 Brother will hand over brother to death, and a father his child. Children will rise against parents and have them put to death.
MAR 13:13 You will be hated by everyone because of my name. But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
MAR 13:14 “But when you see the abomination of desolation standing where it should not be (let the reader understand), then those in Judea must flee to the mountains.
MAR 13:15 The one on the roof must not come down or go inside to take anything out of his house.
MAR 13:16 The one in the field must not turn back to get his cloak.
MAR 13:17 Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing their babies in those days!
MAR 13:18 Pray that it may not be in winter.
MAR 13:19 For in those days there will be suffering unlike anything that has happened from the beginning of the creation that God created until now, or ever will happen.
MAR 13:20 And if the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would be saved. But because of the elect, whom he chose, he has cut them short.
MAR 13:21 Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe him.
MAR 13:22 For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, the elect.
MAR 13:23 Be careful! I have told you everything ahead of time.
MAR 13:24 “But in those days, after that suffering, the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light;
MAR 13:25 the stars will be falling from heaven, and the powers in the heavens will be shaken.
MAR 13:26 Then everyone will see the Son of Man arriving in the clouds with great power and glory.
MAR 13:27 Then he will send angels and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven.
MAR 13:28 “Learn this parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near.
MAR 13:29 So also you, when you see these things happening, know that he is near, right at the door.
MAR 13:30 I tell you the truth, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place.
MAR 13:31 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
MAR 13:32 “But as for that day or hour no one knows it – neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son – except the Father.
MAR 13:33 Watch out! Stay alert! For you do not know when the time will come.
MAR 13:34 It is like a man going on a journey. He left his house and put his slaves in charge, assigning to each his work, and commanded the doorkeeper to stay alert.
MAR 13:35 Stay alert, then, because you do not know when the owner of the house will return – whether during evening, at midnight, when the rooster crows, or at dawn –
MAR 13:36 or else he might find you asleep when he returns suddenly.
MAR 13:37 What I say to you I say to everyone: Stay alert!”
MAR 14:1 Two days before the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the chief priests and the experts in the law were trying to find a way to arrest Jesus by stealth and kill him.
MAR 14:2 For they said, “Not during the feast, so there won’t be a riot among the people.”
MAR 14:3 Now while Jesus was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper, reclining at the table, a woman came with an alabaster jar of costly aromatic oil from pure nard. After breaking open the jar, she poured it on his head.
MAR 14:4 But some who were present indignantly said to one another, “Why this waste of expensive ointment?
MAR 14:5 It could have been sold for more than three hundred silver coins and the money given to the poor!” So they spoke angrily to her.
MAR 14:6 But Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Why are you bothering her? She has done a good service for me.
MAR 14:7 For you will always have the poor with you, and you can do good for them whenever you want. But you will not always have me!
MAR 14:8 She did what she could. She anointed my body beforehand for burial.
MAR 14:9 I tell you the truth, wherever the gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her.”
MAR 14:10 Then Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests to betray Jesus into their hands.
MAR 14:11 When they heard this, they were delighted and promised to give him money. So Judas began looking for an opportunity to betray him.
MAR 14:12 Now on the first day of the feast of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb is sacrificed, Jesus’ disciples said to him, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
MAR 14:13 He sent two of his disciples and told them, “Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him.
MAR 14:14 Wherever he enters, tell the owner of the house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is my guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
MAR 14:15 He will show you a large room upstairs, furnished and ready. Make preparations for us there.”
MAR 14:16 So the disciples left, went into the city, and found things just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
MAR 14:17 Then, when it was evening, he came to the house with the twelve.
MAR 14:18 While they were at the table eating, Jesus said, “I tell you the truth, one of you eating with me will betray me.”
MAR 14:19 They were distressed, and one by one said to him, “Surely not I?”
MAR 14:20 He said to them, “It is one of the twelve, one who dips his hand with me into the bowl.
MAR 14:21 For the Son of Man will go as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for him if he had never been born.”
MAR 14:22 While they were eating, he took bread, and after giving thanks he broke it, gave it to them, and said, “Take it. This is my body.”
MAR 14:23 And after taking the cup and giving thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank from it.
MAR 14:24 He said to them, “This is my blood, the blood of the covenant, that is poured out for many.
MAR 14:25 I tell you the truth, I will no longer drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”
MAR 14:26 After singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
MAR 14:27 Then Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away, for it is written, ‘ I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’
MAR 14:28 But after I am raised, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
MAR 14:29 Peter said to him, “Even if they all fall away, I will not!”
MAR 14:30 Jesus said to him, “I tell you the truth, today – this very night – before a rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.”
MAR 14:31 But Peter insisted emphatically, “Even if I must die with you, I will never deny you.” And all of them said the same thing.
MAR 14:32 Then they went to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.”
MAR 14:33 He took Peter, James, and John with him, and became very troubled and distressed.
MAR 14:34 He said to them, “My soul is deeply grieved, even to the point of death. Remain here and stay alert.”
MAR 14:35 Going a little farther, he threw himself to the ground and prayed that if it were possible the hour would pass from him.
MAR 14:36 He said, “Abba, Father, all things are possible for you. Take this cup away from me. Yet not what I will, but what you will.”
MAR 14:37 Then he came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, “Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn’t you stay awake for one hour?
MAR 14:38 Stay awake and pray that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
MAR 14:39 He went away again and prayed the same thing.
MAR 14:40 When he came again he found them sleeping; they could not keep their eyes open. And they did not know what to tell him.
MAR 14:41 He came a third time and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Enough of that! The hour has come. Look, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
MAR 14:42 Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer is approaching!”
MAR 14:43 Right away, while Jesus was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived. With him came a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests and experts in the law and elders.
MAR 14:44 (Now the betrayer had given them a sign, saying, “The one I kiss is the man. Arrest him and lead him away under guard.”)
MAR 14:45 When Judas arrived, he went up to Jesus immediately and said, “Rabbi!” and kissed him.
MAR 14:46 Then they took hold of him and arrested him.
MAR 14:47 One of the bystanders drew his sword and struck the high priest’s slave, cutting off his ear.
MAR 14:48 Jesus said to them, “Have you come with swords and clubs to arrest me like you would an outlaw?
MAR 14:49 Day after day I was with you, teaching in the temple courts, yet you did not arrest me. But this has happened so that the scriptures would be fulfilled.”
MAR 14:50 Then all the disciples left him and fled.
MAR 14:51 A young man was following him, wearing only a linen cloth. They tried to arrest him,
MAR 14:52 but he ran off naked, leaving his linen cloth behind.
MAR 14:53 Then they led Jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests and elders and experts in the law came together.
MAR 14:54 And Peter had followed him from a distance, up to the high priest’s courtyard. He was sitting with the guards and warming himself by the fire.
MAR 14:55 The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death, but they did not find anything.
MAR 14:56 Many gave false testimony against him, but their testimony did not agree.
MAR 14:57 Some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:
MAR 14:58 “We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple made with hands and in three days build another not made with hands.’”
MAR 14:59 Yet even on this point their testimony did not agree.
MAR 14:60 Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, “Have you no answer? What is this that they are testifying against you?”
MAR 14:61 But he was silent and did not answer. Again the high priest questioned him, “Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?”
MAR 14:62 “I am,” said Jesus, “and you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”
MAR 14:63 Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, “Why do we still need witnesses?
MAR 14:64 You have heard the blasphemy! What is your verdict?” They all condemned him as deserving death.
MAR 14:65 Then some began to spit on him, and to blindfold him, and to strike him with their fists, saying, “Prophesy!” The guards also took him and beat him.
MAR 14:66 Now while Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the high priest’s slave girls came by.
MAR 14:67 When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked directly at him and said, “You also were with that Nazarene, Jesus.”
MAR 14:68 But he denied it: “I don’t even understand what you’re talking about!” Then he went out to the gateway, and a rooster crowed.
MAR 14:69 When the slave girl saw him, she began again to say to the bystanders, “This man is one of them.”
MAR 14:70 But he denied it again. A short time later the bystanders again said to Peter, “You must be one of them, because you are also a Galilean.”
MAR 14:71 Then he began to curse, and he swore with an oath, “I do not know this man you are talking about!”
MAR 14:72 Immediately a rooster crowed a second time. Then Peter remembered what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” And he broke down and wept.
MAR 15:1 Early in the morning, after forming a plan, the chief priests with the elders and the experts in the law and the whole Sanhedrin tied Jesus up, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate.
MAR 15:2 So Pilate asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He replied, “You say so.”
MAR 15:3 Then the chief priests began to accuse him repeatedly.
MAR 15:4 So Pilate asked him again, “Have you nothing to say? See how many charges they are bringing against you!”
MAR 15:5 But Jesus made no further reply, so that Pilate was amazed.
MAR 15:6 During the feast it was customary to release one prisoner to the people, whomever they requested.
MAR 15:7 A man named Barabbas was imprisoned with rebels who had committed murder during an insurrection.
MAR 15:8 Then the crowd came up and began to ask Pilate to release a prisoner for them, as was his custom.
MAR 15:9 So Pilate asked them, “Do you want me to release the king of the Jews for you?”
MAR 15:10 (For he knew that the chief priests had handed him over because of envy.)
MAR 15:11 But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas instead.
MAR 15:12 So Pilate spoke to them again, “Then what do you want me to do with the one you call king of the Jews?”
MAR 15:13 They shouted back, “Crucify him!”
MAR 15:14 Pilate asked them, “Why? What has he done wrong?” But they shouted more insistently, “Crucify him!”
MAR 15:15 Because he wanted to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released Barabbas for them. Then, after he had Jesus flogged, he handed him over to be crucified.
MAR 15:16 So the soldiers led him into the palace (that is, the governor’s residence) and called together the whole cohort.
MAR 15:17 They put a purple cloak on him and after braiding a crown of thorns, they put it on him.
MAR 15:18 They began to salute him: “Hail, king of the Jews!”
MAR 15:19 Again and again they struck him on the head with a staff and spit on him. Then they knelt down and paid homage to him.
MAR 15:20 When they had finished mocking him, they stripped him of the purple cloak and put his own clothes back on him. Then they led him away to crucify him.
MAR 15:21 The soldiers forced a passerby to carry his cross, Simon of Cyrene, who was coming in from the country (he was the father of Alexander and Rufus).
MAR 15:22 They brought Jesus to a place called Golgotha (which is translated, “Place of the Skull”).
MAR 15:23 They offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.
MAR 15:24 Then they crucified him and divided his clothes, throwing dice for them, to decide what each would take.
MAR 15:25 It was nine o’clock in the morning when they crucified him.
MAR 15:26 The inscription of the charge against him read, “The king of the Jews.”
MAR 15:27 And they crucified two outlaws with him, one on his right and one on his left.
MAR 15:28 
MAR 15:29 Those who passed by defamed him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! You who can destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days,
MAR 15:30 save yourself and come down from the cross!”
MAR 15:31 In the same way even the chief priests – together with the experts in the law – were mocking him among themselves: “He saved others, but he cannot save himself!
MAR 15:32 Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down from the cross now, that we may see and believe!” Those who were crucified with him also spoke abusively to him.
MAR 15:33 Now when it was noon, darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon.
MAR 15:34 Around three o’clock Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “ Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?” which means, “ My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
MAR 15:35 When some of the bystanders heard it they said, “Listen, he is calling for Elijah!”
MAR 15:36 Then someone ran, filled a sponge with sour wine, put it on a stick, and gave it to him to drink, saying, “Leave him alone! Let’s see if Elijah will come to take him down!”
MAR 15:37 But Jesus cried out with a loud voice and breathed his last.
MAR 15:38 And the temple curtain was torn in two, from top to bottom.
MAR 15:39 Now when the centurion, who stood in front of him, saw how he died, he said, “Truly this man was God’s Son!”
MAR 15:40 There were also women, watching from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome.
MAR 15:41 When he was in Galilee, they had followed him and given him support. Many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem were there too.
MAR 15:42 Now when evening had already come, since it was the day of preparation (that is, the day before the Sabbath),
MAR 15:43 Joseph of Arimathea, a highly regarded member of the council, who was himself looking forward to the kingdom of God, went boldly to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
MAR 15:44 Pilate was surprised that he was already dead. He called the centurion and asked him if he had been dead for some time.
MAR 15:45 When Pilate was informed by the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
MAR 15:46 After Joseph bought a linen cloth and took down the body, he wrapped it in the linen and placed it in a tomb cut out of the rock. Then he rolled a stone across the entrance of the tomb.
MAR 15:47 Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where the body was placed.
MAR 16:1 When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought aromatic spices so that they might go and anoint him.
MAR 16:2 And very early on the first day of the week, at sunrise, they went to the tomb.
MAR 16:3 They had been asking each other, “Who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?”
MAR 16:4 But when they looked up, they saw that the stone, which was very large, had been rolled back.
MAR 16:5 Then as they went into the tomb, they saw a young man dressed in a white robe sitting on the right side; and they were alarmed.
MAR 16:6 But he said to them, “Do not be alarmed. You are looking for Jesus the Nazarene, who was crucified. He has been raised! He is not here. Look, there is the place where they laid him.
MAR 16:7 But go, tell his disciples, even Peter, that he is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there, just as he told you.”
MAR 16:8 Then they went out and ran from the tomb, for terror and bewilderment had seized them. And they said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.
MAR 16:9 [[Early on the first day of the week, after he arose, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had driven out seven demons.
MAR 16:10 She went out and told those who were with him, while they were mourning and weeping.
MAR 16:11 And when they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they did not believe.
MAR 16:12 After this he appeared in a different form to two of them while they were on their way to the country.
MAR 16:13 They went back and told the rest, but they did not believe them.
MAR 16:14 Then he appeared to the eleven themselves, while they were eating, and he rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they did not believe those who had seen him resurrected.
MAR 16:15 He said to them, “Go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.
MAR 16:16 The one who believes and is baptized will be saved, but the one who does not believe will be condemned.
MAR 16:17 These signs will accompany those who believe: In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new languages;
MAR 16:18 they will pick up snakes with their hands, and whatever poison they drink will not harm them; they will place their hands on the sick and they will be well.”
MAR 16:19 After the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God.
MAR 16:20 They went out and proclaimed everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the word through the accompanying signs.]]
LUK 1:1 Now many have undertaken to compile an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,
LUK 1:2 like the accounts passed on to us by those who were eyewitnesses and servants of the word from the beginning.
LUK 1:3 So it seemed good to me as well, because I have followed all things carefully from the beginning, to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,
LUK 1:4 so that you may know for certain the things you were taught.
LUK 1:5 During the reign of Herod king of Judea, there lived a priest named Zechariah who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah, and he had a wife named Elizabeth, who was a descendant of Aaron.
LUK 1:6 They were both righteous in the sight of God, following all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blamelessly.
LUK 1:7 But they did not have a child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both very old.
LUK 1:8 Now while Zechariah was serving as priest before God when his division was on duty,
LUK 1:9 he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to enter the holy place of the Lord and burn incense.
LUK 1:10 Now the whole crowd of people were praying outside at the hour of the incense offering.
LUK 1:11 An angel of the Lord, standing on the right side of the altar of incense, appeared to him.
LUK 1:12 And Zechariah, visibly shaken when he saw the angel, was seized with fear.
LUK 1:13 But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son; you will name him John.
LUK 1:14 Joy and gladness will come to you, and many will rejoice at his birth,
LUK 1:15 for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He must never drink wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even before his birth.
LUK 1:16 He will turn many of the people of Israel to the Lord their God.
LUK 1:17 And he will go as forerunner before the Lord in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers back to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared for him.”
LUK 1:18 Zechariah said to the angel, “How can I be sure of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is old as well.”
LUK 1:19 The angel answered him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God, and I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.
LUK 1:20 And now, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time, you will be silent, unable to speak, until the day these things take place.”
LUK 1:21 Now the people were waiting for Zechariah, and they began to wonder why he was delayed in the holy place.
LUK 1:22 When he came out, he was not able to speak to them. They realized that he had seen a vision in the holy place, because he was making signs to them and remained unable to speak.
LUK 1:23 When his time of service was over, he went to his home.
LUK 1:24 After some time his wife Elizabeth became pregnant, and for five months she kept herself in seclusion. She said,
LUK 1:25 “This is what the Lord has done for me at the time when he has been gracious to me, to take away my disgrace among people.”
LUK 1:26 In the sixth month of Elizabeth’s pregnancy, the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a town of Galilee called Nazareth,
LUK 1:27 to a virgin engaged to a man whose name was Joseph, a descendant of David, and the virgin’s name was Mary.
LUK 1:28 The angel came to her and said, “Greetings, favored one, the Lord is with you!”
LUK 1:29 But she was greatly troubled by his words and began to wonder about the meaning of this greeting.
LUK 1:30 So the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God!
LUK 1:31 Listen: You will become pregnant and give birth to a son, and you will name him Jesus.
LUK 1:32 He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High, and the Lord God will give him the throne of his father David.
LUK 1:33 He will reign over the house of Jacob forever, and his kingdom will never end.”
LUK 1:34 Mary said to the angel, “How will this be, since I have not had sexual relations with a man?”
LUK 1:35 The angel replied, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore the child to be born will be holy; he will be called the Son of God.
LUK 1:36 “And look, your relative Elizabeth has also become pregnant with a son in her old age – although she was called barren, she is now in her sixth month!
LUK 1:37 For nothing will be impossible with God.”
LUK 1:38 So Mary said, “Yes, I am a servant of the Lord; let this happen to me according to your word.” Then the angel departed from her.
LUK 1:39 In those days Mary got up and went hurriedly into the hill country, to a town of Judah,
LUK 1:40 and entered Zechariah’s house and greeted Elizabeth.
LUK 1:41 When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
LUK 1:42 She exclaimed with a loud voice, “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the child in your womb!
LUK 1:43 And who am I that the mother of my Lord should come and visit me?
LUK 1:44 For the instant the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
LUK 1:45 And blessed is she who believed that what was spoken to her by the Lord would be fulfilled.”
LUK 1:46 And Mary said, “My soul exalts the Lord,
LUK 1:47 and my spirit has begun to rejoice in God my Savior,
LUK 1:48 because he has looked upon the humble state of his servant. For from now on all generations will call me blessed,
LUK 1:49 because he who is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is his name;
LUK 1:50 from generation to generation he is merciful to those who fear him.
LUK 1:51 He has demonstrated power with his arm; he has scattered those whose pride wells up from the sheer arrogance of their hearts.
LUK 1:52 He has brought down the mighty from their thrones, and has lifted up those of lowly position;
LUK 1:53 he has filled the hungry with good things, and has sent the rich away empty.
LUK 1:54 He has helped his servant Israel, remembering his mercy,
LUK 1:55 as he promised to our ancestors, to Abraham and to his descendants forever.”
LUK 1:56 So Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three months and then returned to her home.
LUK 1:57 Now the time came for Elizabeth to have her baby, and she gave birth to a son.
LUK 1:58 Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown great mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
LUK 1:59 On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they wanted to name him Zechariah after his father.
LUK 1:60 But his mother replied, “No! He must be named John.”
LUK 1:61 They said to her, “But none of your relatives bears this name.”
LUK 1:62 So they made signs to the baby’s father, inquiring what he wanted to name his son.
LUK 1:63 He asked for a writing tablet and wrote, “His name is John.” And they were all amazed.
LUK 1:64 Immediately Zechariah’s mouth was opened and his tongue released, and he spoke, blessing God.
LUK 1:65 All their neighbors were filled with fear, and throughout the entire hill country of Judea all these things were talked about.
LUK 1:66 All who heard these things kept them in their hearts, saying, “What then will this child be?” For the Lord’s hand was indeed with him.
LUK 1:67 Then his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied,
LUK 1:68 “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has come to help and has redeemed his people.
LUK 1:69 For he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David,
LUK 1:70 as he spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets from long ago,
LUK 1:71 that we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate us.
LUK 1:72 He has done this to show mercy to our ancestors, and to remember his holy covenant –
LUK 1:73 the oath that he swore to our ancestor Abraham. This oath grants
LUK 1:74 that we, being rescued from the hand of our enemies, may serve him without fear,
LUK 1:75 in holiness and righteousness before him for as long as we live.
LUK 1:76 And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High. For you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,
LUK 1:77 to give his people knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins.
LUK 1:78 Because of our God’s tender mercy the dawn will break upon us from on high
LUK 1:79 to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.”
LUK 1:80 And the child kept growing and becoming strong in spirit, and he was in the wilderness until the day he was revealed to Israel.
LUK 2:1 Now in those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus to register all the empire for taxes.
LUK 2:2 This was the first registration, taken when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
LUK 2:3 Everyone went to his own town to be registered.
LUK 2:4 So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth because he was of the house and family line of David.
LUK 2:5 He went to be registered with Mary, who was promised in marriage to him, and who was expecting a child.
LUK 2:6 While they were there, the time came for her to deliver her child.
LUK 2:7 And she gave birth to her firstborn son and wrapped him in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn.
LUK 2:8 Now there were shepherds nearby living out in the field, keeping guard over their flock at night.
LUK 2:9 An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were absolutely terrified.
LUK 2:10 But the angel said to them, “Do not be afraid! Listen carefully, for I proclaim to you good news that brings great joy to all the people:
LUK 2:11 Today your Savior is born in the city of David. He is Christ the Lord.
LUK 2:12 This will be a sign for you: You will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth and lying in a manger.”
LUK 2:13 Suddenly a vast, heavenly army appeared with the angel, praising God and saying,
LUK 2:14 “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among people with whom he is pleased!”
LUK 2:15 When the angels left them and went back to heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let us go over to Bethlehem and see this thing that has taken place, that the Lord has made known to us.”
LUK 2:16 So they hurried off and located Mary and Joseph, and found the baby lying in a manger.
LUK 2:17 When they saw him, they related what they had been told about this child,
LUK 2:18 and all who heard it were astonished at what the shepherds said.
LUK 2:19 But Mary treasured up all these words, pondering in her heart what they might mean.
LUK 2:20 So the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen; everything was just as they had been told.
LUK 2:21 At the end of eight days, when he was circumcised, he was named Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
LUK 2:22 Now when the time came for their purification according to the law of Moses, Joseph and Mary brought Jesus up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord
LUK 2:23 (just as it is written in the law of the Lord, “ Every firstborn male will be set apart to the Lord” ),
LUK 2:24 and to offer a sacrifice according to what is specified in the law of the Lord, a pair of doves of doves or two young pigeons.
LUK 2:25 Now there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon who was righteous and devout, looking for the restoration of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
LUK 2:26 It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not die before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
LUK 2:27 So Simeon, directed by the Spirit, came into the temple courts, and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him what was customary according to the law,
LUK 2:28 Simeon took him in his arms and blessed God, saying,
LUK 2:29 “Now, according to your word, Sovereign Lord, permit your servant to depart in peace.
LUK 2:30 For my eyes have seen your salvation
LUK 2:31 that you have prepared in the presence of all peoples:
LUK 2:32 a light, for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to your people Israel.”
LUK 2:33 So the child’s father and mother were amazed at what was said about him.
LUK 2:34 Then Simeon blessed them and said to his mother Mary, “Listen carefully: This child is destined to be the cause of the falling and rising of many in Israel and to be a sign that will be rejected.
LUK 2:35 Indeed, as a result of him the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed – and a sword will pierce your own soul as well!”
LUK 2:36 There was also a prophetess, Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was very old, having been married to her husband for seven years until his death.
LUK 2:37 She had lived as a widow since then for eighty-four years. She never left the temple, worshiping with fasting and prayer night and day.
LUK 2:38 At that moment, she came up to them and began to give thanks to God and to speak about the child to all who were waiting for the redemption of Jerusalem.
LUK 2:39 So when Joseph and Mary had performed everything according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.
LUK 2:40 And the child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom, and the favor of God was upon him.
LUK 2:41 Now Jesus’ parents went to Jerusalem every year for the feast of the Passover.
LUK 2:42 When he was twelve years old, they went up according to custom.
LUK 2:43 But when the feast was over, as they were returning home, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. His parents did not know it,
LUK 2:44 but (because they assumed that he was in their group of travelers) they went a day’s journey. Then they began to look for him among their relatives and acquaintances.
LUK 2:45 When they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem to look for him.
LUK 2:46 After three days they found him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.
LUK 2:47 And all who heard Jesus were astonished at his understanding and his answers.
LUK 2:48 When his parents saw him, they were overwhelmed. His mother said to him, “Child, why have you treated us like this? Look, your father and I have been looking for you anxiously.”
LUK 2:49 But he replied, “Why were you looking for me? Didn’t you know that I must be in my Father’s house?”
LUK 2:50 Yet his parents did not understand the remark he made to them.
LUK 2:51 Then he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them. But his mother kept all these things in her heart.
LUK 2:52 And Jesus increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favor with God and with people.
LUK 3:1 In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip was tetrarch of the region of Iturea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene,
LUK 3:2 during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
LUK 3:3 He went into all the region around the Jordan River, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
LUK 3:4 As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, “The voice of one shouting in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make his paths straight*.
LUK 3:5 Every valley will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be brought low, and the crooked will be made straight, and the rough ways will be made smooth,
LUK 3:6 and all humanity will see the salvation of God.’”
LUK 3:7 So John said to the crowds that came out to be baptized by him, “You offspring of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
LUK 3:8 Therefore produce fruit that proves your repentance, and don’t begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that God can raise up children for Abraham from these stones!
LUK 3:9 Even now the ax is laid at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
LUK 3:10 So the crowds were asking him, “What then should we do?”
LUK 3:11 John answered them, “The person who has two tunics must share with the person who has none, and the person who has food must do likewise.”
LUK 3:12 Tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, “Teacher, what should we do?”
LUK 3:13 He told them, “Collect no more than you are required to.”
LUK 3:14 Then some soldiers also asked him, “And as for us – what should we do?” He told them, “Take money from no one by violence or by false accusation, and be content with your pay.”
LUK 3:15 While the people were filled with anticipation and they all wondered whether perhaps John could be the Christ,
LUK 3:16 John answered them all, “I baptize you with water, but one more powerful than I am is coming – I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
LUK 3:17 His winnowing fork is in his hand to clean out his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with inextinguishable fire.”
LUK 3:18 And in this way, with many other exhortations, John proclaimed good news to the people.
LUK 3:19 But when John rebuked Herod the tetrarch because of Herodias, his brother’s wife, and because of all the evil deeds that he had done,
LUK 3:20 Herod added this to them all: He locked up John in prison.
LUK 3:21 Now when all the people were baptized, Jesus also was baptized. And while he was praying, the heavens opened,
LUK 3:22 and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven, “You are my one dear Son; in you I take great delight.”
LUK 3:23 So Jesus, when he began his ministry, was about thirty years old. He was the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
LUK 3:24 the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
LUK 3:25 the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
LUK 3:26 the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,
LUK 3:27 the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
LUK 3:28 the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
LUK 3:29 the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
LUK 3:30 the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
LUK 3:31 the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
LUK 3:32 the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon,
LUK 3:33 the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
LUK 3:34 the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
LUK 3:35 the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
LUK 3:36 the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
LUK 3:37 the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalalel, the son of Kenan,
LUK 3:38 the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
LUK 4:1 Then Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan River and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness,
LUK 4:2 where for forty days he endured temptations from the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and when they were completed, he was famished.
LUK 4:3 The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.”
LUK 4:4 Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘ Man does not live by bread alone.’”
LUK 4:5 Then the devil led him up to a high place and showed him in a flash all the kingdoms of the world.
LUK 4:6 And he said to him, “To you I will grant this whole realm – and the glory that goes along with it, for it has been relinquished to me, and I can give it to anyone I wish.
LUK 4:7 So then, if you will worship me, all this will be yours.”
LUK 4:8 Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘ You are to worship the Lord your God and serve only him.’”
LUK 4:9 Then the devil brought him to Jerusalem, had him stand on the highest point of the temple, and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here,
LUK 4:10 for it is written, ‘ He will command his angels concerning you, to protect you,’
LUK 4:11 and ‘ with their hands they will lift you up, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.’”
LUK 4:12 Jesus answered him, “It is said, ‘ You are not to put the Lord your God to the test.’”
LUK 4:13 So when the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from him until a more opportune time.
LUK 4:14 Then Jesus, in the power of the Spirit, returned to Galilee, and news about him spread throughout the surrounding countryside.
LUK 4:15 He began to teach in their synagogues and was praised by all.
LUK 4:16 Now Jesus came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, as was his custom. He stood up to read,
LUK 4:17 and the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was given to him. He unrolled the scroll and found the place where it was written,
LUK 4:18 “ The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim release to the captives and the regaining of sight to the blind, to set free those who are oppressed,
LUK 4:19 to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
LUK 4:20 Then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fixed on him.
LUK 4:21 Then he began to tell them, “Today this scripture has been fulfilled even as you heard it being read.”
LUK 4:22 All were speaking well of him, and were amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth. They said, “Isn’t this Joseph’s son?”
LUK 4:23 Jesus said to them, “No doubt you will quote to me the proverb, ‘Physician, heal yourself!’ and say, ‘What we have heard that you did in Capernaum, do here in your hometown too.’”
LUK 4:24 And he added, “I tell you the truth, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.
LUK 4:25 But in truth I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in Elijah’s days, when the sky was shut up three and a half years, and there was a great famine over all the land.
LUK 4:26 Yet Elijah was sent to none of them, but only to a woman who was a widow at Zarephath in Sidon.
LUK 4:27 And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, yet none of them was cleansed except Naaman the Syrian.”
LUK 4:28 When they heard this, all the people in the synagogue were filled with rage.
LUK 4:29 They got up, forced him out of the town, and brought him to the brow of the hill on which their town was built, so that they could throw him down the cliff.
LUK 4:30 But he passed through the crowd and went on his way.
LUK 4:31 So he went down to Capernaum, a town in Galilee, and on the Sabbath he began to teach the people.
LUK 4:32 They were amazed at his teaching, because he spoke with authority.
LUK 4:33 Now in the synagogue there was a man who had the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
LUK 4:34 “Ha! Leave us alone, Jesus the Nazarene! Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are – the Holy One of God.”
LUK 4:35 But Jesus rebuked him: “Silence! Come out of him!” Then, after the demon threw the man down in their midst, he came out of him without hurting him.
LUK 4:36 They were all amazed and began to say to one another, “What’s happening here? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!”
LUK 4:37 So the news about him spread into all areas of the region.
LUK 4:38 After Jesus left the synagogue, he entered Simon’s house. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked Jesus to help her.
LUK 4:39 So he stood over her, commanded the fever, and it left her. Immediately she got up and began to serve them.
LUK 4:40 As the sun was setting, all those who had any relatives sick with various diseases brought them to Jesus. He placed his hands on every one of them and healed them.
LUK 4:41 Demons also came out of many, crying out, “You are the Son of God!” But he rebuked them, and would not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
LUK 4:42 The next morning Jesus departed and went to a deserted place. Yet the crowds were seeking him, and they came to him and tried to keep him from leaving them.
LUK 4:43 But Jesus said to them, “I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns too, for that is what I was sent to do.”
LUK 4:44 So he continued to preach in the synagogues of Judea.
LUK 5:1 Now Jesus was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret, and the crowd was pressing around him to hear the word of God.
LUK 5:2 He saw two boats by the lake, but the fishermen had gotten out of them and were washing their nets.
LUK 5:3 He got into one of the boats, which was Simon’s, and asked him to put out a little way from the shore. Then Jesus sat down and taught the crowds from the boat.
LUK 5:4 When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into the deep water and lower your nets for a catch.”
LUK 5:5 Simon answered, “Master, we worked hard all night and caught nothing! But at your word I will lower the nets.”
LUK 5:6 When they had done this, they caught so many fish that their nets started to tear.
LUK 5:7 So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and help them. And they came and filled both boats, so that they were about to sink.
LUK 5:8 But when Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, “Go away from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man!”
LUK 5:9 For Peter and all who were with him were astonished at the catch of fish that they had taken,
LUK 5:10 and so were James and John, Zebedee’s sons, who were Simon’s business partners. Then Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid; from now on you will be catching people.”
LUK 5:11 So when they had brought their boats to shore, they left everything and followed him.
LUK 5:12 While Jesus was in one of the towns, a man came to him who was covered with leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he bowed down with his face to the ground and begged him, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
LUK 5:13 So he stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing. Be clean!” And immediately the leprosy left him.
LUK 5:14 Then he ordered the man to tell no one, but commanded him, “Go and show yourself to a priest, and bring the offering for your cleansing, as Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
LUK 5:15 But the news about him spread even more, and large crowds were gathering together to hear him and to be healed of their illnesses.
LUK 5:16 Yet Jesus himself frequently withdrew to the wilderness and prayed.
LUK 5:17 Now on one of those days, while he was teaching, there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting nearby (who had come from every village of Galilee and Judea and from Jerusalem), and the power of the Lord was with him to heal.
LUK 5:18 Just then some men showed up, carrying a paralyzed man on a stretcher. They were trying to bring him in and place him before Jesus.
LUK 5:19 But since they found no way to carry him in because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and let him down on the stretcher through the roof tiles right in front of Jesus.
LUK 5:20 When Jesus saw their faith he said, “Friend, your sins are forgiven.”
LUK 5:21 Then the experts in the law and the Pharisees began to think to themselves, “Who is this man who is uttering blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
LUK 5:22 When Jesus perceived their hostile thoughts, he said to them, “Why are you raising objections within yourselves?
LUK 5:23 Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Stand up and walk’?
LUK 5:24 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins” – he said to the paralyzed man – “I tell you, stand up, take your stretcher and go home.”
LUK 5:25 Immediately he stood up before them, picked up the stretcher he had been lying on, and went home, glorifying God.
LUK 5:26 Then astonishment seized them all, and they glorified God. They were filled with awe, saying, “We have seen incredible things today.”
LUK 5:27 After this, Jesus went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax booth. “Follow me,” he said to him.
LUK 5:28 And he got up and followed him, leaving everything behind.
LUK 5:29 Then Levi gave a great banquet in his house for Jesus, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others sitting at the table with them.
LUK 5:30 But the Pharisees and their experts in the law complained to his disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
LUK 5:31 Jesus answered them, “Those who are well don’t need a physician, but those who are sick do.
LUK 5:32 I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”
LUK 5:33 Then they said to him, “John’s disciples frequently fast and pray, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours continue to eat and drink.”
LUK 5:34 So Jesus said to them, “You cannot make the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them, can you?
LUK 5:35 But those days are coming, and when the bridegroom is taken from them, at that time they will fast.”
LUK 5:36 He also told them a parable: “No one tears a patch from a new garment and sews it on an old garment. If he does, he will have torn the new, and the piece from the new will not match the old.
LUK 5:37 And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins and will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.
LUK 5:38 Instead new wine must be poured into new wineskins.
LUK 5:39 No one after drinking old wine wants the new, for he says, ‘The old is good enough.’”
LUK 6:1 Jesus was going through the grain fields on a Sabbath, and his disciples picked some heads of wheat, rubbed them in their hands, and ate them.
LUK 6:2 But some of the Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is against the law on the Sabbath?”
LUK 6:3 Jesus answered them, “Haven’t you read what David did when he and his companions were hungry –
LUK 6:4 how he entered the house of God, took and ate the sacred bread, which is not lawful for any to eat but the priests alone, and gave it to his companions?”
LUK 6:5 Then he said to them, “The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.”
LUK 6:6 On another Sabbath, Jesus entered the synagogue and was teaching. Now a man was there whose right hand was withered.
LUK 6:7 The experts in the law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely to see if he would heal on the Sabbath, so that they could find a reason to accuse him.
LUK 6:8 But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man who had the withered hand, “Get up and stand here.” So he rose and stood there.
LUK 6:9 Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil, to save a life or to destroy it?”
LUK 6:10 After looking around at them all, he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” The man did so, and his hand was restored.
LUK 6:11 But they were filled with mindless rage and began debating with one another what they would do to Jesus.
LUK 6:12 Now it was during this time that Jesus went out to the mountain to pray, and he spent all night in prayer to God.
LUK 6:13 When morning came, he called his disciples and chose twelve of them, whom he also named apostles:
LUK 6:14 Simon (whom he named Peter), and his brother Andrew; and James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,
LUK 6:15 Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon who was called the Zealot,
LUK 6:16 Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
LUK 6:17 Then he came down with them and stood on a level place. And a large number of his disciples had gathered along with a vast multitude from all over Judea, from Jerusalem, They came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases,
LUK 6:18 and those who suffered from unclean spirits were cured.
LUK 6:19 The whole crowd was trying to touch him, because power was coming out from him and healing them all.
LUK 6:20 Then he looked up at his disciples and said: “Blessed are you who are poor, for the kingdom of God belongs to you.
LUK 6:21 “Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. “Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
LUK 6:22 “Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude you and insult you and reject you as evil on account of the Son of Man!
LUK 6:23 Rejoice in that day, and jump for joy, because your reward is great in heaven. For their ancestors did the same things to the prophets.
LUK 6:24 “But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your comfort already.
LUK 6:25 “Woe to you who are well satisfied with food now, for you will be hungry. “Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
LUK 6:26 “Woe to you when all people speak well of you, for their ancestors did the same things to the false prophets.
LUK 6:27 “But I say to you who are listening: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
LUK 6:28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
LUK 6:29 To the person who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other as well, and from the person who takes away your coat, do not withhold your tunic either.
LUK 6:30 Give to everyone who asks you, and do not ask for your possessions back from the person who takes them away.
LUK 6:31 Treat others in the same way that you would want them to treat you.
LUK 6:32 “If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
LUK 6:33 And if you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners do the same.
LUK 6:34 And if you lend to those from whom you hope to be repaid, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, so that they may be repaid in full.
LUK 6:35 But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing back. Then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, because he is kind to ungrateful and evil people.
LUK 6:36 Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
LUK 6:37 “Do not judge, and you will not be judged; do not condemn, and you will not be condemned; forgive, and you will be forgiven.
LUK 6:38 Give, and it will be given to you: A good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be poured into your lap. For the measure you use will be the measure you receive.”
LUK 6:39 He also told them a parable: “Someone who is blind cannot lead another who is blind, can he? Won’t they both fall into a pit?
LUK 6:40 A disciple is not greater than his teacher, but everyone when fully trained will be like his teacher.
LUK 6:41 Why do you see the speck in your brother’s eye, but fail to see the beam of wood in your own?
LUK 6:42 How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me remove the speck from your eye,’ while you yourself don’t see the beam in your own? You hypocrite! First remove the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
LUK 6:43 “For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good fruit,
LUK 6:44 for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thorns, nor are grapes picked from brambles.
LUK 6:45 The good person out of the good treasury of his heart produces good, and the evil person out of his evil treasury produces evil, for his mouth speaks from what fills his heart.
LUK 6:46 “Why do you call me ‘Lord, Lord,’ and don’t do what I tell you?
LUK 6:47 “Everyone who comes to me and listens to my words and puts them into practice – I will show you what he is like:
LUK 6:48 He is like a man building a house, who dug down deep, and laid the foundation on bedrock. When a flood came, the river burst against that house but could not shake it, because it had been well built.
LUK 6:49 But the person who hears and does not put my words into practice is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. When the river burst against that house, it collapsed immediately, and was utterly destroyed!”
LUK 7:1 After Jesus had finished teaching all this to the people, he entered Capernaum.
LUK 7:2 A centurion there had a slave who was highly regarded, but who was sick and at the point of death.
LUK 7:3 When the centurion heard about Jesus, he sent some Jewish elders to him, asking him to come and heal his slave.
LUK 7:4 When they came to Jesus, they urged him earnestly, “He is worthy to have you do this for him,
LUK 7:5 because he loves our nation, and even built our synagogue.”
LUK 7:6 So Jesus went with them. When he was not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to say to him, “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof.
LUK 7:7 That is why I did not presume to come to you. Instead, say the word, and my servant must be healed.
LUK 7:8 For I too am a man set under authority, with soldiers under me. I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
LUK 7:9 When Jesus heard this, he was amazed at him. He turned and said to the crowd that followed him, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith!”
LUK 7:10 So when those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the slave well.
LUK 7:11 Soon afterward Jesus went to a town called Nain, and his disciples and a large crowd went with him.
LUK 7:12 As he approached the town gate, a man who had died was being carried out, the only son of his mother (who was a widow ), and a large crowd from the town was with her.
LUK 7:13 When the Lord saw her, he had compassion for her and said to her, “Do not weep.”
LUK 7:14 Then he came up and touched the bier, and those who carried it stood still. He said, “Young man, I say to you, get up!”
LUK 7:15 So the dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus gave him back to his mother.
LUK 7:16 Fear seized them all, and they began to glorify God, saying, “A great prophet has appeared among us!” and “God has come to help his people!”
LUK 7:17 This report about Jesus circulated throughout Judea and all the surrounding country.
LUK 7:18 John’s disciples informed him about all these things. So John called two of his disciples
LUK 7:19 and sent them to Jesus to ask, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?”
LUK 7:20 When the men came to Jesus, they said, “John the Baptist has sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?’”
LUK 7:21 At that very time Jesus cured many people of diseases, sicknesses, and evil spirits, and granted sight to many who were blind.
LUK 7:22 So he answered them, “Go tell John what you have seen and heard: The blind see, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have good news proclaimed to them.
LUK 7:23 Blessed is anyone who takes no offense at me.”
LUK 7:24 When John’s messengers had gone, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
LUK 7:25 What did you go out to see? A man dressed in fancy clothes? Look, those who wear fancy clothes and live in luxury are in kings’ courts!
LUK 7:26 What did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
LUK 7:27 This is the one about whom it is written, ‘ Look, I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
LUK 7:28 I tell you, among those born of women no one is greater than John. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he is.”
LUK 7:29 (Now all the people who heard this, even the tax collectors, acknowledged God’s justice, because they had been baptized with John’s baptism.
LUK 7:30 However, the Pharisees and the experts in religious law rejected God’s purpose for themselves, because they had not been baptized by John. )
LUK 7:31 “To what then should I compare the people of this generation, and what are they like?
LUK 7:32 They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling out to one another, ‘We played the flute for you, yet you did not dance; we wailed in mourning, yet you did not weep.’
LUK 7:33 For John the Baptist has come eating no bread and drinking no wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon!’
LUK 7:34 The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Look at him, a glutton and a drunk, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
LUK 7:35 But wisdom is vindicated by all her children.”
LUK 7:36 Now one of the Pharisees asked Jesus to have dinner with him, so he went into the Pharisee’s house and took his place at the table.
LUK 7:37 Then when a woman of that town, who was a sinner, learned that Jesus was dining at the Pharisee’s house, she brought an alabaster jar of perfumed oil.
LUK 7:38 As she stood behind him at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears. She wiped them with her hair, kissed them, and anointed them with the perfumed oil.
LUK 7:39 Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would know who and what kind of woman this is who is touching him, that she is a sinner.”
LUK 7:40 So Jesus answered him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” He replied, “Say it, Teacher.”
LUK 7:41 “A certain creditor had two debtors; one owed him five hundred silver coins, and the other fifty.
LUK 7:42 When they could not pay, he canceled the debts of both. Now which of them will love him more?”
LUK 7:43 Simon answered, “I suppose the one who had the bigger debt canceled.” Jesus said to him, “You have judged rightly.”
LUK 7:44 Then, turning toward the woman, he said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I entered your house. You gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
LUK 7:45 You gave me no kiss of greeting, but from the time I entered she has not stopped kissing my feet.
LUK 7:46 You did not anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with perfumed oil.
LUK 7:47 Therefore I tell you, her sins, which were many, are forgiven, thus she loved much; but the one who is forgiven little loves little.”
LUK 7:48 Then Jesus said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.”
LUK 7:49 But those who were at the table with him began to say among themselves, “Who is this, who even forgives sins?”
LUK 7:50 He said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
LUK 8:1 Some time afterward he went on through towns and villages, preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. The twelve were with him,
LUK 8:2 and also some women who had been healed of evil spirits and disabilities: Mary (called Magdalene), from whom seven demons had gone out,
LUK 8:3 and Joanna the wife of Cuza (Herod’s household manager), Susanna, and many others who provided for them out of their own resources.
LUK 8:4 While a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to Jesus from one town after another, he spoke to them in a parable:
LUK 8:5 “A sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some fell along the path and was trampled on, and the wild birds devoured it.
LUK 8:6 Other seed fell on rock, and when it came up, it withered because it had no moisture.
LUK 8:7 Other seed fell among the thorns, and they grew up with it and choked it.
LUK 8:8 But other seed fell on good soil and grew, and it produced a hundred times as much grain.” As he said this, he called out, “The one who has ears to hear had better listen!”
LUK 8:9 Then his disciples asked him what this parable meant.
LUK 8:10 He said, “You have been given the opportunity to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but for others they are in parables, so that although they see they may not see, and although they hear they may not understand.
LUK 8:11 “Now the parable means this: The seed is the word of God.
LUK 8:12 Those along the path are the ones who have heard; then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.
LUK 8:13 Those on the rock are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. They believe for a while, but in a time of testing fall away.
LUK 8:14 As for the seed that fell among thorns, these are the ones who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by the worries and riches and pleasures of life, and their fruit does not mature.
LUK 8:15 But as for the seed that landed on good soil, these are the ones who, after hearing the word, cling to it with an honest and good heart, and bear fruit with steadfast endurance.
LUK 8:16 “No one lights a lamp and then covers it with a jar or puts it under a bed, but puts it on a lampstand so that those who come in can see the light.
LUK 8:17 For nothing is hidden that will not be revealed, and nothing concealed that will not be made known and brought to light.
LUK 8:18 So listen carefully, for whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he thinks he has will be taken from him.”
LUK 8:19 Now Jesus’ mother and his brothers came to him, but they could not get near him because of the crowd.
LUK 8:20 So he was told, “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
LUK 8:21 But he replied to them, “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and do it.”
LUK 8:22 One day Jesus got into a boat with his disciples and said to them, “Let’s go across to the other side of the lake.” So they set out,
LUK 8:23 and as they sailed he fell asleep. Now a violent windstorm came down on the lake, and the boat started filling up with water, and they were in danger.
LUK 8:24 They came and woke him, saying, “Master, Master, we are about to die!” So he got up and rebuked the wind and the raging waves; they died down, and it was calm.
LUK 8:25 Then he said to them, “Where is your faith?” But they were afraid and amazed, saying to one another, “Who then is this? He commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him!”
LUK 8:26 So they sailed over to the region of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee.
LUK 8:27 As Jesus stepped ashore, a certain man from the town met him who was possessed by demons. For a long time this man had worn no clothes and had not lived in a house, but among the tombs.
LUK 8:28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out, fell down before him, and shouted with a loud voice, “Leave me alone, Jesus, Son of the Most High God! I beg you, do not torment me!”
LUK 8:29 For Jesus had started commanding the evil spirit to come out of the man. (For it had seized him many times, so he would be bound with chains and shackles and kept under guard. But he would break the restraints and be driven by the demon into deserted places.)
LUK 8:30 Jesus then asked him, “What is your name?” He said, “Legion,” because many demons had entered him.
LUK 8:31 And they began to beg him not to order them to depart into the abyss.
LUK 8:32 Now a large herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside, and the demonic spirits begged Jesus to let them go into them. He gave them permission.
LUK 8:33 So the demons came out of the man and went into the pigs, and the herd of pigs rushed down the steep slope into the lake and drowned.
LUK 8:34 When the herdsmen saw what had happened, they ran off and spread the news in the town and countryside.
LUK 8:35 So the people went out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus. They found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at Jesus’ feet, clothed and in his right mind, and they were afraid.
LUK 8:36 Those who had seen it told them how the man who had been demon-possessed had been healed.
LUK 8:37 Then all the people of the Gerasenes and the surrounding region asked Jesus to leave them alone, for they were seized with great fear. So he got into the boat and left.
LUK 8:38 The man from whom the demons had gone out begged to go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
LUK 8:39 “Return to your home, and declare what God has done for you.” So he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole town what Jesus had done for him.
LUK 8:40 Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, because they were all waiting for him.
LUK 8:41 Then a man named Jairus, who was a ruler of the synagogue, came up. Falling at Jesus’ feet, he pleaded with him to come to his house,
LUK 8:42 because he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. As Jesus was on his way, the crowds pressed around him.
LUK 8:43 Now a woman was there who had been suffering from a hemorrhage for twelve years but could not be healed by anyone.
LUK 8:44 She came up behind Jesus and touched the edge of his cloak, and at once the bleeding stopped.
LUK 8:45 Then Jesus asked, “Who was it who touched me?” When they all denied it, Peter said, “Master, the crowds are surrounding you and pressing against you!”
LUK 8:46 But Jesus said, “Someone touched me, for I know that power has gone out from me.”
LUK 8:47 When the woman saw that she could not escape notice, she came trembling and fell down before him. In the presence of all the people, she explained why she had touched him and how she had been immediately healed.
LUK 8:48 Then he said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace.”
LUK 8:49 While he was still speaking, someone from the synagogue ruler’s house came and said, “Your daughter is dead; do not trouble the teacher any longer.”
LUK 8:50 But when Jesus heard this, he told him, “Do not be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
LUK 8:51 Now when he came to the house, Jesus did not let anyone go in with him except Peter, John, and James, and the child’s father and mother.
LUK 8:52 Now they were all wailing and mourning for her, but he said, “Stop your weeping; she is not dead but asleep.”
LUK 8:53 And they began making fun of him, because they knew that she was dead.
LUK 8:54 But Jesus gently took her by the hand and said, “Child, get up.”
LUK 8:55 Her spirit returned, and she got up immediately. Then he told them to give her something to eat.
LUK 8:56 Her parents were astonished, but he ordered them to tell no one what had happened.
LUK 9:1 After Jesus called the twelve together, he gave them power and authority over all demons and to cure diseases,
LUK 9:2 and he sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
LUK 9:3 He said to them, “Take nothing for your journey – no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, and do not take an extra tunic.
LUK 9:4 Whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave the area.
LUK 9:5 Wherever they do not receive you, as you leave that town, shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
LUK 9:6 Then they departed and went throughout the villages, proclaiming the good news and healing people everywhere.
LUK 9:7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard about everything that was happening, and he was thoroughly perplexed, because some people were saying that John had been raised from the dead,
LUK 9:8 while others were saying that Elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the prophets of long ago had risen.
LUK 9:9 Herod said, “I had John beheaded, but who is this about whom I hear such things?” So Herod wanted to learn about Jesus.
LUK 9:10 When the apostles returned, they told Jesus everything they had done. Then he took them with him and they withdrew privately to a town called Bethsaida.
LUK 9:11 But when the crowds found out, they followed him. He welcomed them, spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and cured those who needed healing.
LUK 9:12 Now the day began to draw to a close, so the twelve came and said to Jesus, “Send the crowd away, so they can go into the surrounding villages and countryside and find lodging and food, because we are in an isolated place.”
LUK 9:13 But he said to them, “You give them something to eat.” They replied, “We have no more than five loaves and two fish – unless we go and buy food for all these people.”
LUK 9:14 (Now about five thousand men were there.) Then he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.”
LUK 9:15 So they did as Jesus directed, and the people all sat down.
LUK 9:16 Then he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven he gave thanks and broke them. He gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
LUK 9:17 They all ate and were satisfied, and what was left over was picked up – twelve baskets of broken pieces.
LUK 9:18 Once when Jesus was praying by himself, and his disciples were nearby, he asked them, “Who do the crowds say that I am?”
LUK 9:19 They answered, “John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others that one of the prophets of long ago has risen.”
LUK 9:20 Then he said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “The Christ of God.”
LUK 9:21 But he forcefully commanded them not to tell this to anyone,
LUK 9:22 saying, “The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and experts in the law, and be killed, and on the third day be raised.”
LUK 9:23 Then he said to them all, “If anyone wants to become my follower, he must deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow me.
LUK 9:24 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will save it.
LUK 9:25 For what does it benefit a person if he gains the whole world but loses or forfeits himself?
LUK 9:26 For whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of that person when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
LUK 9:27 But I tell you most certainly, there are some standing here who will not experience death before they see the kingdom of God.”
LUK 9:28 Now about eight days after these sayings, Jesus took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up the mountain to pray.
LUK 9:29 As he was praying, the appearance of his face was transformed, and his clothes became very bright, a brilliant white.
LUK 9:30 Then two men, Moses and Elijah, began talking with him.
LUK 9:31 They appeared in glorious splendor and spoke about his departure that he was about to carry out at Jerusalem.
LUK 9:32 Now Peter and those with him were quite sleepy, but as they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
LUK 9:33 Then as the men were starting to leave, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three shelters, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah” – not knowing what he was saying.
LUK 9:34 As he was saying this, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
LUK 9:35 Then a voice came from the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, my Chosen One. Listen to him!”
LUK 9:36 After the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. So they kept silent and told no one at that time anything of what they had seen.
LUK 9:37 Now on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
LUK 9:38 Then a man from the crowd cried out, “Teacher, I beg you to look at my son – he is my only child!
LUK 9:39 A spirit seizes him, and he suddenly screams; it throws him into convulsions and causes him to foam at the mouth. It hardly ever leaves him alone, torturing him severely.
LUK 9:40 I begged your disciples to cast it out, but they could not do so.”
LUK 9:41 Jesus answered, “You unbelieving and perverse generation! How much longer must I be with you and endure you? Bring your son here.”
LUK 9:42 As the boy was approaching, the demon threw him to the ground and shook him with convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
LUK 9:43 Then they were all astonished at the mighty power of God. But while the entire crowd was amazed at everything Jesus was doing, he said to his disciples,
LUK 9:44 “Take these words to heart, for the Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men.”
LUK 9:45 But they did not understand this statement; its meaning had been concealed from them, so that they could not grasp it. Yet they were afraid to ask him about this statement.
LUK 9:46 Now an argument started among the disciples as to which of them might be the greatest.
LUK 9:47 But when Jesus discerned their innermost thoughts, he took a child, had him stand by his side,
LUK 9:48 and said to them, “Whoever welcomes this child in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me, for the one who is least among you all is the one who is great.”
LUK 9:49 John answered, “Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we tried to stop him because he is not a disciple along with us.”
LUK 9:50 But Jesus said to him, “Do not stop him, for whoever is not against you is for you.”
LUK 9:51 Now when the days drew near for him to be taken up, Jesus set out resolutely to go to Jerusalem.
LUK 9:52 He sent messengers on ahead of him. As they went along, they entered a Samaritan village to make things ready in advance for him,
LUK 9:53 but the villagers refused to welcome him, because he was determined to go to Jerusalem.
LUK 9:54 Now when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, “Lord, do you want us to call fire to come down from heaven and consume them?”
LUK 9:55 But Jesus turned and rebuked them,
LUK 9:56 and they went on to another village.
LUK 9:57 As they were walking along the road, someone said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go.”
LUK 9:58 Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens and the birds in the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”
LUK 9:59 Jesus said to another, “Follow me.” But he replied, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
LUK 9:60 But Jesus said to him, “Let the dead bury their own dead, but as for you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.”
LUK 9:61 Yet another said, “I will follow you, Lord, but first let me say goodbye to my family.”
LUK 9:62 Jesus said to him, “No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.”
LUK 10:1 After this the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them on ahead of him two by two into every town and place where he himself was about to go.
LUK 10:2 He said to them, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.
LUK 10:3 Go! I am sending you out like lambs surrounded by wolves.
LUK 10:4 Do not carry a money bag, a traveler’s bag, or sandals, and greet no one on the road.
LUK 10:5 Whenever you enter a house, first say, ‘May peace be on this house!’
LUK 10:6 And if a peace-loving person is there, your peace will remain on him, but if not, it will return to you.
LUK 10:7 Stay in that same house, eating and drinking what they give you, for the worker deserves his pay. Do not move around from house to house.
LUK 10:8 Whenever you enter a town and the people welcome you, eat what is set before you.
LUK 10:9 Heal the sick in that town and say to them, ‘The kingdom of God has come upon you!’
LUK 10:10 But whenever you enter a town and the people do not welcome you, go into its streets and say,
LUK 10:11 ‘Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this: The kingdom of God has come.’
LUK 10:12 I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town!
LUK 10:13 “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles done in you had been done in Tyre they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
LUK 10:14 But it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for you!
LUK 10:15 And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? No, you will be thrown down to Hades!
LUK 10:16 “The one who listens to you listens to me, and the one who rejects you rejects me, and the one who rejects me rejects the one who sent me.”
LUK 10:17 Then the seventy-two returned with joy, saying, “Lord, even the demons submit to us in your name!”
LUK 10:18 So he said to them, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
LUK 10:19 Look, I have given you authority to tread on snakes and scorpions and on the full force of the enemy, and nothing will hurt you.
LUK 10:20 Nevertheless, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names stand written in heaven.”
LUK 10:21 On that same occasion Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for this was your gracious will.
LUK 10:22 All things have been given to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is except the Father, or who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son decides to reveal him.”
LUK 10:23 Then Jesus turned to his disciples and said privately, “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see!
LUK 10:24 For I tell you that many prophets and kings longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.”
LUK 10:25 Now an expert in religious law stood up to test Jesus, saying, “Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
LUK 10:26 He said to him, “What is written in the law? How do you understand it?”
LUK 10:27 The expert answered, “ Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind, and love your neighbor as yourself.”
LUK 10:28 Jesus said to him, “You have answered correctly; do this, and you will live.”
LUK 10:29 But the expert, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
LUK 10:30 Jesus replied, “A man was going down from Jerusalem and fell into the hands of robbers, who stripped him, beat him up, and went off, leaving him half dead.
LUK 10:31 Now by chance a priest was going down that road, but when he saw the injured man he passed by on the other side.
LUK 10:32 So too a Levite, when he came up to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
LUK 10:33 But a Samaritan who was traveling came to where the injured man was, and when he saw him, he felt compassion for him.
LUK 10:34 He went up to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. Then he put him on his own animal, brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
LUK 10:35 The next day he took out two silver coins and gave them to the innkeeper, saying, ‘Take care of him, and whatever else you spend, I will repay you when I come back this way.’
LUK 10:36 Which of these three do you think became a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of the robbers?”
LUK 10:37 The expert in religious law said, “The one who showed mercy to him.” So Jesus said to him, “Go and do the same.”
LUK 10:38 Now as they went on their way, Jesus entered a certain village where a woman named Martha welcomed him as a guest.
LUK 10:39 She had a sister named Mary, who sat at the Lord’s feet and listened to what he said.
LUK 10:40 But Martha was distracted with all the preparations she had to make, so she came up to him and said, “Lord, don’t you care that my sister has left me to do all the work alone? Tell her to help me.”
LUK 10:41 But the Lord answered her, “Martha, Martha, you are worried and troubled about many things,
LUK 10:42 but one thing is needed. Mary has chosen the best part; it will not be taken away from her.”
LUK 11:1 Now Jesus was praying in a certain place. When he stopped, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray, just as John taught his disciples.”
LUK 11:2 So he said to them, “When you pray, say: Father, may your name be honored; may your kingdom come.
LUK 11:3 Give us each day our daily bread,
LUK 11:4 and forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against us. And do not lead us into temptation.”
LUK 11:5 Then he said to them, “Suppose one of you has a friend, and you go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
LUK 11:6 because a friend of mine has stopped here while on a journey, and I have nothing to set before him.’
LUK 11:7 Then he will reply from inside, ‘Do not bother me. The door is already shut, and my children and I are in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’
LUK 11:8 I tell you, even though the man inside will not get up and give him anything because he is his friend, yet because of the first man’s sheer persistence he will get up and give him whatever he needs.
LUK 11:9 “So I tell you: Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened for you.
LUK 11:10 For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
LUK 11:11 What father among you, if your son asks for a fish, will give him a snake instead of a fish?
LUK 11:12 Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
LUK 11:13 If you then, although you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!”
LUK 11:14 Now he was casting out a demon that was mute. When the demon had gone out, the man who had been mute began to speak, and the crowds were amazed.
LUK 11:15 But some of them said, “By the power of Beelzebul, the ruler of demons, he casts out demons.”
LUK 11:16 Others, to test him, began asking for a sign from heaven.
LUK 11:17 But Jesus, realizing their thoughts, said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is destroyed, and a divided household falls.
LUK 11:18 So if Satan too is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? I ask you this because you claim that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
LUK 11:19 Now if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.
LUK 11:20 But if I cast out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has already overtaken you.
LUK 11:21 When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own palace, his possessions are safe.
LUK 11:22 But when a stronger man attacks and conquers him, he takes away the first man’s armor on which the man relied and divides up his plunder.
LUK 11:23 Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
LUK 11:24 “When an unclean spirit goes out of a person, it passes through waterless places looking for rest but not finding any. Then it says, ‘I will return to the home I left.’
LUK 11:25 When it returns, it finds the house swept clean and put in order.
LUK 11:26 Then it goes and brings seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go in and live there, so the last state of that person is worse than the first.”
LUK 11:27 As he said these things, a woman in the crowd spoke out to him, “Blessed is the womb that bore you and the breasts at which you nursed!”
LUK 11:28 But he replied, “Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and obey it!”
LUK 11:29 As the crowds were increasing, Jesus began to say, “This generation is a wicked generation; it looks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.
LUK 11:30 For just as Jonah became a sign to the people of Nineveh, so the Son of Man will be a sign to this generation.
LUK 11:31 The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with the people of this generation and condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon – and now, something greater than Solomon is here!
LUK 11:32 The people of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they repented when Jonah preached to them – and now, something greater than Jonah is here!
LUK 11:33 “No one after lighting a lamp puts it in a hidden place or under a basket, but on a lampstand, so that those who come in can see the light.
LUK 11:34 Your eye is the lamp of your body. When your eye is healthy, your whole body is full of light, but when it is diseased, your body is full of darkness.
LUK 11:35 Therefore see to it that the light in you is not darkness.
LUK 11:36 If then your whole body is full of light, with no part in the dark, it will be as full of light as when the light of a lamp shines on you.”
LUK 11:37 As he spoke, a Pharisee invited Jesus to have a meal with him, so he went in and took his place at the table.
LUK 11:38 The Pharisee was astonished when he saw that Jesus did not first wash his hands before the meal.
LUK 11:39 But the Lord said to him, “Now you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and the plate, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.
LUK 11:40 You fools! Didn’t the one who made the outside make the inside as well?
LUK 11:41 But give from your heart to those in need, and then everything will be clean for you.
LUK 11:42 “But woe to you Pharisees! You give a tenth of your mint, rue, and every herb, yet you neglect justice and love for God! But you should have done these things without neglecting the others.
LUK 11:43 Woe to you Pharisees! You love the best seats in the synagogues and elaborate greetings in the marketplaces!
LUK 11:44 Woe to you! You are like unmarked graves, and people walk over them without realizing it!”
LUK 11:45 One of the experts in religious law answered him, “Teacher, when you say these things you insult us too.”
LUK 11:46 But Jesus replied, “Woe to you experts in religious law as well! You load people down with burdens difficult to bear, yet you yourselves refuse to touch the burdens with even one of your fingers!
LUK 11:47 Woe to you! You build the tombs of the prophets whom your ancestors killed.
LUK 11:48 So you testify that you approve of the deeds of your ancestors, because they killed the prophets and you build their tombs!
LUK 11:49 For this reason also the wisdom of God said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and persecute,’
LUK 11:50 so that this generation may be held accountable for the blood of all the prophets that has been shed since the beginning of the world,
LUK 11:51 from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who was killed between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I tell you, it will be charged against this generation.
LUK 11:52 Woe to you experts in religious law! You have taken away the key to knowledge! You did not go in yourselves, and you hindered those who were going in.”
LUK 11:53 When he went out from there, the experts in the law and the Pharisees began to oppose him bitterly, and to ask him hostile questions about many things,
LUK 11:54 plotting against him, to catch him in something he might say.
LUK 12:1 Meanwhile, when many thousands of the crowd had gathered so that they were trampling on one another, Jesus began to speak first to his disciples, “Be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
LUK 12:2 Nothing is hidden that will not be revealed, and nothing is secret that will not be made known.
LUK 12:3 So then whatever you have said in the dark will be heard in the light, and what you have whispered in private rooms will be proclaimed from the housetops.
LUK 12:4 “I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have nothing more they can do.
LUK 12:5 But I will warn you whom you should fear: Fear the one who, after the killing, has authority to throw you into hell. Yes, I tell you, fear him!
LUK 12:6 Aren’t five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yet not one of them is forgotten before God.
LUK 12:7 In fact, even the hairs on your head are all numbered. Do not be afraid; you are more valuable than many sparrows.
LUK 12:8 “I tell you, whoever acknowledges me before men, the Son of Man will also acknowledge before God’s angels.
LUK 12:9 But the one who denies me before men will be denied before God’s angels.
LUK 12:10 And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but the person who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
LUK 12:11 But when they bring you before the synagogues, the rulers, and the authorities, do not worry about how you should make your defense or what you should say,
LUK 12:12 for the Holy Spirit will teach you at that moment what you must say.”
LUK 12:13 Then someone from the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
LUK 12:14 But Jesus said to him, “Man, who made me a judge or arbitrator between you two?”
LUK 12:15 Then he said to them, “Watch out and guard yourself from all types of greed, because one’s life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions.”
LUK 12:16 He then told them a parable: “The land of a certain rich man produced an abundant crop,
LUK 12:17 so he thought to himself, ‘What should I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?’
LUK 12:18 Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my barns and build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
LUK 12:19 And I will say to myself, “You have plenty of goods stored up for many years; relax, eat, drink, celebrate!”’
LUK 12:20 But God said to him, ‘You fool! This very night your life will be demanded back from you, but who will get what you have prepared for yourself?’
LUK 12:21 So it is with the one who stores up riches for himself, but is not rich toward God.”
LUK 12:22 Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat, or about your body, what you will wear.
LUK 12:23 For there is more to life than food, and more to the body than clothing.
LUK 12:24 Consider the ravens: They do not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn, yet God feeds them. How much more valuable are you than the birds!
LUK 12:25 And which of you by worrying can add an hour to his life?
LUK 12:26 So if you cannot do such a very little thing as this, why do you worry about the rest?
LUK 12:27 Consider how the flowers grow; they do not work or spin. Yet I tell you, not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these!
LUK 12:28 And if this is how God clothes the wild grass, which is here today and tomorrow is tossed into the fire to heat the oven, how much more will he clothe you, you people of little faith!
LUK 12:29 So do not be overly concerned about what you will eat and what you will drink, and do not worry about such things.
LUK 12:30 For all the nations of the world pursue these things, and your Father knows that you need them.
LUK 12:31 Instead, pursue his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well.
LUK 12:32 “Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father is well pleased to give you the kingdom.
LUK 12:33 Sell your possessions and give to the poor. Provide yourselves purses that do not wear out – a treasure in heaven that never decreases, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys.
LUK 12:34 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
LUK 12:35 “Get dressed for service and keep your lamps burning;
LUK 12:36 be like people waiting for their master to come back from the wedding celebration, so that when he comes and knocks they can immediately open the door for him.
LUK 12:37 Blessed are those slaves whom their master finds alert when he returns! I tell you the truth, he will dress himself to serve, have them take their place at the table, and will come and wait on them!
LUK 12:38 Even if he comes in the second or third watch of the night and finds them alert, blessed are those slaves!
LUK 12:39 But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into.
LUK 12:40 You also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.”
LUK 12:41 Then Peter said, “Lord, are you telling this parable for us or for everyone?”
LUK 12:42 The Lord replied, “Who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom the master puts in charge of his household servants, to give them their allowance of food at the proper time?
LUK 12:43 Blessed is that slave whom his master finds at work when he returns.
LUK 12:44 I tell you the truth, the master will put him in charge of all his possessions.
LUK 12:45 But if that slave should say to himself, ‘My master is delayed in returning,’ and he begins to beat the other slaves, both men and women, and to eat, drink, and get drunk,
LUK 12:46 then the master of that slave will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not foresee, and will cut him in two, and assign him a place with the unfaithful.
LUK 12:47 That servant who knew his master’s will but did not get ready or do what his master asked will receive a severe beating.
LUK 12:48 But the one who did not know his master’s will and did things worthy of punishment will receive a light beating. From everyone who has been given much, much will be required, and from the one who has been entrusted with much, even more will be asked.
LUK 12:49 “I have come to bring fire on the earth – and how I wish it were already kindled!
LUK 12:50 I have a baptism to undergo, and how distressed I am until it is finished!
LUK 12:51 Do you think I have come to bring peace on earth? No, I tell you, but rather division!
LUK 12:52 For from now on there will be five in one household divided, three against two and two against three.
LUK 12:53 They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
LUK 12:54 Jesus also said to the crowds, “When you see a cloud rising in the west, you say at once, ‘A rainstorm is coming,’ and it does.
LUK 12:55 And when you see the south wind blowing, you say, ‘There will be scorching heat,’ and there is.
LUK 12:56 You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky, but how can you not know how to interpret the present time?
LUK 12:57 “And why don’t you judge for yourselves what is right?
LUK 12:58 As you are going with your accuser before the magistrate, make an effort to settle with him on the way, so that he will not drag you before the judge, and the judge hand you over to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
LUK 12:59 I tell you, you will never get out of there until you have paid the very last cent!”
LUK 13:1 Now there were some present on that occasion who told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
LUK 13:2 He answered them, “Do you think these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered these things?
LUK 13:3 No, I tell you! But unless you repent, you will all perish as well!
LUK 13:4 Or those eighteen who were killed when the tower in Siloam fell on them, do you think they were worse offenders than all the others who live in Jerusalem?
LUK 13:5 No, I tell you! But unless you repent you will all perish as well!”
LUK 13:6 Then Jesus told this parable: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it and found none.
LUK 13:7 So he said to the worker who tended the vineyard, ‘For three years now, I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, and each time I inspect it I find none. Cut it down! Why should it continue to deplete the soil?’
LUK 13:8 But the worker answered him, ‘Sir, leave it alone this year too, until I dig around it and put fertilizer on it.
LUK 13:9 Then if it bears fruit next year, very well, but if not, you can cut it down.’”
LUK 13:10 Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath,
LUK 13:11 and a woman was there who had been disabled by a spirit for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not straighten herself up completely.
LUK 13:12 When Jesus saw her, he called her to him and said, “Woman, you are freed from your infirmity.”
LUK 13:13 Then he placed his hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and praised God.
LUK 13:14 But the president of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the crowd, “There are six days on which work should be done! So come and be healed on those days, and not on the Sabbath day.”
LUK 13:15 Then the Lord answered him, “You hypocrites! Does not each of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or his donkey from its stall, and lead it to water?
LUK 13:16 Then shouldn’t this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan bound for eighteen long years, be released from this imprisonment on the Sabbath day?”
LUK 13:17 When he said this all his adversaries were humiliated, but the entire crowd was rejoicing at all the wonderful things he was doing.
LUK 13:18 Thus Jesus asked, “What is the kingdom of God like? To what should I compare it?
LUK 13:19 It is like a mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his garden. It grew and became a tree, and the wild birds nested in its branches.”
LUK 13:20 Again he said, “To what should I compare the kingdom of God?
LUK 13:21 It is like yeast that a woman took and mixed with three measures of flour until all the dough had risen.”
LUK 13:22 Then Jesus traveled throughout towns and villages, teaching and making his way toward Jerusalem.
LUK 13:23 Someone asked him, “Lord, will only a few be saved?” So he said to them,
LUK 13:24 “Exert every effort to enter through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will try to enter and will not be able to.
LUK 13:25 Once the head of the house gets up and shuts the door, then you will stand outside and start to knock on the door and beg him, ‘Lord, let us in!’ But he will answer you, ‘I don’t know where you come from.’
LUK 13:26 Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.’
LUK 13:27 But he will reply, ‘I don’t know where you come from! Go away from me, all you evildoers!’
LUK 13:28 There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God but you yourselves thrown out.
LUK 13:29 Then people will come from east and west, and from north and south, and take their places at the banquet table in the kingdom of God.
LUK 13:30 But indeed, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.”
LUK 13:31 At that time, some Pharisees came up and said to Jesus, “Get away from here, because Herod wants to kill you.”
LUK 13:32 But he said to them, “Go and tell that fox, ‘Look, I am casting out demons and performing healings today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will complete my work.
LUK 13:33 Nevertheless I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day, because it is impossible that a prophet should be killed outside Jerusalem.’
LUK 13:34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those who are sent to you! How often I have longed to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you would have none of it!
LUK 13:35 Look, your house is forsaken! And I tell you, you will not see me until you say, ‘Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!’”
LUK 14:1 Now one Sabbath when Jesus went to dine at the house of a leader of the Pharisees, they were watching him closely.
LUK 14:2 There right in front of him was a man suffering from dropsy.
LUK 14:3 So Jesus asked the experts in religious law and the Pharisees, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?”
LUK 14:4 But they remained silent. So Jesus took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him away.
LUK 14:5 Then he said to them, “Which of you, if you have a son or an ox that has fallen into a well on a Sabbath day, will not immediately pull him out?”
LUK 14:6 But they could not reply to this.
LUK 14:7 Then when Jesus noticed how the guests chose the places of honor, he told them a parable. He said to them,
LUK 14:8 “When you are invited by someone to a wedding feast, do not take the place of honor, because a person more distinguished than you may have been invited by your host.
LUK 14:9 So the host who invited both of you will come and say to you, ‘Give this man your place.’ Then, ashamed, you will begin to move to the least important place.
LUK 14:10 But when you are invited, go and take the least important place, so that when your host approaches he will say to you, ‘Friend, move up here to a better place.’ Then you will be honored in the presence of all who share the meal with you.
LUK 14:11 For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”
LUK 14:12 He said also to the man who had invited him, “When you host a dinner or a banquet, don’t invite your friends or your brothers or your relatives or rich neighbors so you can be invited by them in return and get repaid.
LUK 14:13 But when you host an elaborate meal, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, and the blind.
LUK 14:14 Then you will be blessed, because they cannot repay you, for you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous.”
LUK 14:15 When one of those at the meal with Jesus heard this, he said to him, “Blessed is everyone who will feast in the kingdom of God!”
LUK 14:16 But Jesus said to him, “A man once gave a great banquet and invited many guests.
LUK 14:17 At the time for the banquet he sent his slave to tell those who had been invited, ‘Come, because everything is now ready.’
LUK 14:18 But one after another they all began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I have bought a field, and I must go out and see it. Please excuse me.’
LUK 14:19 Another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going out to examine them. Please excuse me.’
LUK 14:20 Another said, ‘I just got married, and I cannot come.’
LUK 14:21 So the slave came back and reported this to his master. Then the master of the household was furious and said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly to the streets and alleys of the city, and bring in the poor, the crippled, the blind, and the lame.’
LUK 14:22 Then the slave said, ‘Sir, what you instructed has been done, and there is still room.’
LUK 14:23 So the master said to his slave, ‘Go out to the highways and country roads and urge people to come in, so that my house will be filled.
LUK 14:24 For I tell you, not one of those individuals who were invited will taste my banquet!’”
LUK 14:25 Now large crowds were accompanying Jesus, and turning to them he said,
LUK 14:26 “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers and sisters, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
LUK 14:27 Whoever does not carry his own cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
LUK 14:28 For which of you, wanting to build a tower, doesn’t sit down first and compute the cost to see if he has enough money to complete it?
LUK 14:29 Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation and is not able to finish the tower, all who see it will begin to make fun of him.
LUK 14:30 They will say, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish!’
LUK 14:31 Or what king, going out to confront another king in battle, will not sit down first and determine whether he is able with ten thousand to oppose the one coming against him with twenty thousand?
LUK 14:32 If he cannot succeed, he will send a representative while the other is still a long way off and ask for terms of peace.
LUK 14:33 In the same way therefore not one of you can be my disciple if he does not renounce all his own possessions.
LUK 14:34 “Salt is good, but if salt loses its flavor, how can its flavor be restored?
LUK 14:35 It is of no value for the soil or for the manure pile; it is to be thrown out. The one who has ears to hear had better listen!”
LUK 15:1 Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming to hear him.
LUK 15:2 But the Pharisees and the experts in the law were complaining, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
LUK 15:3 So Jesus told them this parable:
LUK 15:4 “Which one of you, if he has a hundred sheep and loses one of them, would not leave the ninety-nine in the open pasture and go look for the one that is lost until he finds it?
LUK 15:5 Then when he has found it, he places it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
LUK 15:6 Returning home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, telling them, ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.’
LUK 15:7 I tell you, in the same way there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous people who have no need to repent.
LUK 15:8 “Or what woman, if she has ten silver coins and loses one of them, does not light a lamp, sweep the house, and search thoroughly until she finds it?
LUK 15:9 Then when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I had lost.’
LUK 15:10 In the same way, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of God’s angels over one sinner who repents.”
LUK 15:11 Then Jesus said, “A man had two sons.
LUK 15:12 The younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the estate that will belong to me.’ So he divided his assets between them.
LUK 15:13 After a few days, the younger son gathered together all he had and left on a journey to a distant country, and there he squandered his wealth with a wild lifestyle.
LUK 15:14 Then after he had spent everything, a severe famine took place in that country, and he began to be in need.
LUK 15:15 So he went and worked for one of the citizens of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs.
LUK 15:16 He was longing to eat the carob pods the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything.
LUK 15:17 But when he came to his senses he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired workers have food enough to spare, but here I am dying from hunger!
LUK 15:18 I will get up and go to my father and say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
LUK 15:19 I am no longer worthy to be called your son; treat me like one of your hired workers.”’
LUK 15:20 So he got up and went to his father. But while he was still a long way from home his father saw him, and his heart went out to him; he ran and hugged his son and kissed him.
LUK 15:21 Then his son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you; I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’
LUK 15:22 But the father said to his slaves, ‘Hurry! Bring the best robe, and put it on him! Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet!
LUK 15:23 Bring the fattened calf and kill it! Let us eat and celebrate,
LUK 15:24 because this son of mine was dead, and is alive again – he was lost and is found!’ So they began to celebrate.
LUK 15:25 “Now his older son was in the field. As he came and approached the house, he heard music and dancing.
LUK 15:26 So he called one of the slaves and asked what was happening.
LUK 15:27 The slave replied, ‘Your brother has returned, and your father has killed the fattened calf because he got his son back safe and sound.’
LUK 15:28 But the older son became angry and refused to go in. His father came out and appealed to him,
LUK 15:29 but he answered his father, ‘Look! These many years I have worked like a slave for you, and I never disobeyed your commands. Yet you never gave me even a goat so that I could celebrate with my friends!
LUK 15:30 But when this son of yours came back, who has devoured your assets with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him!’
LUK 15:31 Then the father said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and everything that belongs to me is yours.
LUK 15:32 It was appropriate to celebrate and be glad, for your brother was dead, and is alive; he was lost and is found.’”
LUK 16:1 Jesus also said to the disciples, “There was a rich man who was informed of accusations that his manager was wasting his assets.
LUK 16:2 So he called the manager in and said to him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Turn in the account of your administration, because you can no longer be my manager.’
LUK 16:3 Then the manager said to himself, ‘What should I do, since my master is taking my position away from me? I’m not strong enough to dig, and I’m too ashamed to beg.
LUK 16:4 I know what to do so that when I am put out of management, people will welcome me into their homes.’
LUK 16:5 So he contacted his master’s debtors one by one. He asked the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’
LUK 16:6 The man replied, ‘A hundred measures of olive oil.’ The manager said to him, ‘Take your bill, sit down quickly, and write fifty.’
LUK 16:7 Then he said to another, ‘And how much do you owe?’ The second man replied, ‘A hundred measures of wheat.’ The manager said to him, ‘Take your bill, and write eighty.’
LUK 16:8 The master commended the dishonest manager because he acted shrewdly. For the people of this world are more shrewd in dealing with their contemporaries than the people of light.
LUK 16:9 And I tell you, make friends for yourselves by how you use worldly wealth, so that when it runs out you will be welcomed into the eternal homes.
LUK 16:10 “The one who is faithful in a very little is also faithful in much, and the one who is dishonest in a very little is also dishonest in much.
LUK 16:11 If then you haven’t been trustworthy in handling worldly wealth, who will entrust you with the true riches?
LUK 16:12 And if you haven’t been trustworthy with someone else’s property, who will give you your own ?
LUK 16:13 No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.”
LUK 16:14 The Pharisees (who loved money) heard all this and ridiculed him.
LUK 16:15 But Jesus said to them, “You are the ones who justify yourselves in men’s eyes, but God knows your hearts. For what is highly prized among men is utterly detestable in God’s sight.
LUK 16:16 “The law and the prophets were in force until John; since then, the good news of the kingdom of God has been proclaimed, and everyone is urged to enter it.
LUK 16:17 But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one tiny stroke of a letter in the law to become void.
LUK 16:18 “Everyone who divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery, and the one who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.
LUK 16:19 “There was a rich man who dressed in purple and fine linen and who feasted sumptuously every day.
LUK 16:20 But at his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus whose body was covered with sores,
LUK 16:21 who longed to eat what fell from the rich man’s table. In addition, the dogs came and licked his sores.
LUK 16:22 “Now the poor man died and was carried by the angels to Abraham’s side. The rich man also died and was buried.
LUK 16:23 And in hell, as he was in torment, he looked up and saw Abraham far off with Lazarus at his side.
LUK 16:24 So he called out, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in anguish in this fire.’
LUK 16:25 But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that in your lifetime you received your good things and Lazarus likewise bad things, but now he is comforted here and you are in anguish.
LUK 16:26 Besides all this, a great chasm has been fixed between us, so that those who want to cross over from here to you cannot do so, and no one can cross from there to us.’
LUK 16:27 So the rich man said, ‘Then I beg you, father – send Lazarus to my father’s house
LUK 16:28 (for I have five brothers) to warn them so that they don’t come into this place of torment.’
LUK 16:29 But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the prophets; they must respond to them.’
LUK 16:30 Then the rich man said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’
LUK 16:31 He replied to him, ‘If they do not respond to Moses and the prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead.’”
LUK 17:1 Jesus said to his disciples, “Stumbling blocks are sure to come, but woe to the one through whom they come!
LUK 17:2 It would be better for him to have a millstone tied around his neck and be thrown into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to sin.
LUK 17:3 Watch yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him. If he repents, forgive him.
LUK 17:4 Even if he sins against you seven times in a day, and seven times returns to you saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
LUK 17:5 The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!”
LUK 17:6 So the Lord replied, “If you had faith the size of a mustard seed, you could say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be pulled out by the roots and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you.
LUK 17:7 “Would any one of you say to your slave who comes in from the field after plowing or shepherding sheep, ‘Come at once and sit down for a meal’?
LUK 17:8 Won’t the master instead say to him, ‘Get my dinner ready, and make yourself ready to serve me while I eat and drink. Then you may eat and drink’?
LUK 17:9 He won’t thank the slave because he did what he was told, will he?
LUK 17:10 So you too, when you have done everything you were commanded to do, should say, ‘We are slaves undeserving of special praise; we have only done what was our duty.’”
LUK 17:11 Now on the way to Jerusalem, Jesus was passing along between Samaria and Galilee.
LUK 17:12 As he was entering a village, ten men with leprosy met him. They stood at a distance,
LUK 17:13 raised their voices and said, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.”
LUK 17:14 When he saw them he said, “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” And as they went along, they were cleansed.
LUK 17:15 Then one of them, when he saw he was healed, turned back, praising God with a loud voice.
LUK 17:16 He fell with his face to the ground at Jesus’ feet and thanked him. (Now he was a Samaritan.)
LUK 17:17 Then Jesus said, “Were not ten cleansed? Where are the other nine?
LUK 17:18 Was no one found to turn back and give praise to God except this foreigner?”
LUK 17:19 Then he said to the man, “Get up and go your way. Your faith has made you well.”
LUK 17:20 Now at one point the Pharisees asked Jesus when the kingdom of God was coming, so he answered, “The kingdom of God is not coming with signs to be observed,
LUK 17:21 nor will they say, ‘Look, here it is!’ or ‘There!’ For indeed, the kingdom of God is in your midst.”
LUK 17:22 Then he said to the disciples, “The days are coming when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.
LUK 17:23 Then people will say to you, ‘Look, there he is!’ or ‘Look, here he is!’ Do not go out or chase after them.
LUK 17:24 For just like the lightning flashes and lights up the sky from one side to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day.
LUK 17:25 But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
LUK 17:26 Just as it was in the days of Noah, so too it will be in the days of the Son of Man.
LUK 17:27 People were eating, they were drinking, they were marrying, they were being given in marriage – right up to the day Noah entered the ark. Then the flood came and destroyed them all.
LUK 17:28 Likewise, just as it was in the days of Lot, people were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building;
LUK 17:29 but on the day Lot went out from Sodom, fire and sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all.
LUK 17:30 It will be the same on the day the Son of Man is revealed.
LUK 17:31 On that day, anyone who is on the roof, with his goods in the house, must not come down to take them away, and likewise the person in the field must not turn back.
LUK 17:32 Remember Lot’s wife!
LUK 17:33 Whoever tries to keep his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life will preserve it.
LUK 17:34 I tell you, in that night there will be two people in one bed; one will be taken and the other left.
LUK 17:35 There will be two women grinding grain together; one will be taken and the other left.”
LUK 17:36 
LUK 17:37 Then the disciples said to him, “Where, Lord?” He replied to them, “Where the dead body is, there the vultures will gather.”
LUK 18:1 Then Jesus told them a parable to show them they should always pray and not lose heart.
LUK 18:2 He said, “In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected people.
LUK 18:3 There was also a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’
LUK 18:4 For a while he refused, but later on he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor have regard for people,
LUK 18:5 yet because this widow keeps on bothering me, I will give her justice, or in the end she will wear me out by her unending pleas.’”
LUK 18:6 And the Lord said, “Listen to what the unrighteous judge says!
LUK 18:7 Won’t God give justice to his chosen ones, who cry out to him day and night? Will he delay long to help them?
LUK 18:8 I tell you, he will give them justice speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?”
LUK 18:9 Jesus also told this parable to some who were confident that they were righteous and looked down on everyone else.
LUK 18:10 “Two men went up to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
LUK 18:11 The Pharisee stood and prayed about himself like this: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other people: extortionists, unrighteous people, adulterers – or even like this tax collector.
LUK 18:12 I fast twice a week; I give a tenth of everything I get.’
LUK 18:13 The tax collector, however, stood far off and would not even look up to heaven, but beat his breast and said, ‘God, be merciful to me, sinner that I am!’
LUK 18:14 I tell you that this man went down to his home justified rather than the Pharisee. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted.”
LUK 18:15 Now people were even bringing their babies to him for him to touch. But when the disciples saw it, they began to scold those who brought them.
LUK 18:16 But Jesus called for the children, saying, “Let the little children come to me and do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
LUK 18:17 I tell you the truth, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child will never enter it.”
LUK 18:18 Now a certain ruler asked him, “Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
LUK 18:19 Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone.
LUK 18:20 You know the commandments: ‘ Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not give false testimony, honor your father and mother.’”
LUK 18:21 The man replied, “I have wholeheartedly obeyed all these laws since my youth.”
LUK 18:22 When Jesus heard this, he said to him, “One thing you still lack. Sell all that you have and give the money to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”
LUK 18:23 But when the man heard this he became very sad, for he was extremely wealthy.
LUK 18:24 When Jesus noticed this, he said, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!
LUK 18:25 In fact, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”
LUK 18:26 Those who heard this said, “Then who can be saved?”
LUK 18:27 He replied, “What is impossible for mere humans is possible for God.”
LUK 18:28 And Peter said, “Look, we have left everything we own to follow you!”
LUK 18:29 Then Jesus said to them, “I tell you the truth, there is no one who has left home or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of God’s kingdom
LUK 18:30 who will not receive many times more in this age – and in the age to come, eternal life.”
LUK 18:31 Then Jesus took the twelve aside and said to them, “Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written about the Son of Man by the prophets will be accomplished.
LUK 18:32 For he will be handed over to the Gentiles; he will be mocked, mistreated, and spat on.
LUK 18:33 They will flog him severely and kill him. Yet on the third day he will rise again.”
LUK 18:34 But the twelve understood none of these things. This saying was hidden from them, and they did not grasp what Jesus meant.
LUK 18:35 As Jesus approached Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the road begging.
LUK 18:36 When he heard a crowd going by, he asked what was going on.
LUK 18:37 They told him, “Jesus the Nazarene is passing by.”
LUK 18:38 So he called out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
LUK 18:39 And those who were in front scolded him to get him to be quiet, but he shouted even more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
LUK 18:40 So Jesus stopped and ordered the beggar to be brought to him. When the man came near, Jesus asked him,
LUK 18:41 “What do you want me to do for you?” He replied, “Lord, let me see again.”
LUK 18:42 Jesus said to him, “Receive your sight; your faith has healed you.”
LUK 18:43 And immediately he regained his sight and followed Jesus, praising God. When all the people saw it, they too gave praise to God.
LUK 19:1 Jesus entered Jericho and was passing through it.
LUK 19:2 Now a man named Zacchaeus was there; he was a chief tax collector and was rich.
LUK 19:3 He was trying to get a look at Jesus, but being a short man he could not see over the crowd.
LUK 19:4 So he ran on ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him, because Jesus was going to pass that way.
LUK 19:5 And when Jesus came to that place, he looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down quickly, because I must stay at your house today.”
LUK 19:6 So he came down quickly and welcomed Jesus joyfully.
LUK 19:7 And when the people saw it, they all complained, “He has gone in to be the guest of a man who is a sinner.”
LUK 19:8 But Zacchaeus stopped and said to the Lord, “Look, Lord, half of my possessions I now give to the poor, and if I have cheated anyone of anything, I am paying back four times as much!”
LUK 19:9 Then Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this household, because he too is a son of Abraham!
LUK 19:10 For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.”
LUK 19:11 While the people were listening to these things, Jesus proceeded to tell a parable, because he was near to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear immediately.
LUK 19:12 Therefore he said, “A nobleman went to a distant country to receive for himself a kingdom and then return.
LUK 19:13 And he summoned ten of his slaves, gave them ten minas, and said to them, ‘Do business with these until I come back.’
LUK 19:14 But his citizens hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We do not want this man to be king over us!’
LUK 19:15 When he returned after receiving the kingdom, he summoned these slaves to whom he had given the money. He wanted to know how much they had earned by trading.
LUK 19:16 So the first one came before him and said, ‘Sir, your mina has made ten minas more.’
LUK 19:17 And the king said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because you have been faithful in a very small matter, you will have authority over ten cities.’
LUK 19:18 Then the second one came and said, ‘Sir, your mina has made five minas.’
LUK 19:19 So the king said to him, ‘And you are to be over five cities.’
LUK 19:20 Then another slave came and said, ‘Sir, here is your mina that I put away for safekeeping in a piece of cloth.
LUK 19:21 For I was afraid of you, because you are a severe man. You withdraw what you did not deposit and reap what you did not sow.’
LUK 19:22 The king said to him, ‘I will judge you by your own words, you wicked slave! So you knew, did you, that I was a severe man, withdrawing what I didn’t deposit and reaping what I didn’t sow?
LUK 19:23 Why then didn’t you put my money in the bank, so that when I returned I could have collected it with interest?’
LUK 19:24 And he said to his attendants, ‘Take the mina from him, and give it to the one who has ten.’
LUK 19:25 But they said to him, ‘Sir, he has ten minas already!’
LUK 19:26 ‘I tell you that everyone who has will be given more, but from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
LUK 19:27 But as for these enemies of mine who did not want me to be their king, bring them here and slaughter them in front of me!’”
LUK 19:28 After Jesus had said this, he continued on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
LUK 19:29 Now when he approached Bethphage and Bethany, at the place called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
LUK 19:30 telling them, “Go to the village ahead of you. When you enter it, you will find a colt tied there that has never been ridden. Untie it and bring it here.
LUK 19:31 If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ just say, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
LUK 19:32 So those who were sent ahead found it exactly as he had told them.
LUK 19:33 As they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, “Why are you untying that colt?”
LUK 19:34 They replied, “The Lord needs it.”
LUK 19:35 Then they brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the colt, and had Jesus get on it.
LUK 19:36 As he rode along, they spread their cloaks on the road.
LUK 19:37 As he approached the road leading down from the Mount of Olives, the whole crowd of his disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works they had seen:
LUK 19:38 “ Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!”
LUK 19:39 But some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.”
LUK 19:40 He answered, “I tell you, if they keep silent, the very stones will cry out!”
LUK 19:41 Now when Jesus approached and saw the city, he wept over it,
LUK 19:42 saying, “If you had only known on this day, even you, the things that make for peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes.
LUK 19:43 For the days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and surround you and close in on you from every side.
LUK 19:44 They will demolish you – you and your children within your walls – and they will not leave within you one stone on top of another, because you did not recognize the time of your visitation from God.”
LUK 19:45 Then Jesus entered the temple courts and began to drive out those who were selling things there,
LUK 19:46 saying to them, “It is written, ‘ My house will be a house of prayer,’ but you have turned it into a den of robbers!”
LUK 19:47 Jesus was teaching daily in the temple courts. The chief priests and the experts in the law and the prominent leaders among the people were seeking to assassinate him,
LUK 19:48 but they could not find a way to do it, for all the people hung on his words.
LUK 20:1 Now one day, as Jesus was teaching the people in the temple courts and proclaiming the gospel, the chief priests and the experts in the law with the elders came up
LUK 20:2 and said to him, “Tell us: By what authority are you doing these things? Or who it is who gave you this authority?”
LUK 20:3 He answered them, “I will also ask you a question, and you tell me:
LUK 20:4 John’s baptism – was it from heaven or from people?”
LUK 20:5 So they discussed it with one another, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
LUK 20:6 But if we say, ‘From people,’ all the people will stone us, because they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
LUK 20:7 So they replied that they did not know where it came from.
LUK 20:8 Then Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by whose authority I do these things.”
LUK 20:9 Then he began to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, leased it to tenant farmers, and went on a journey for a long time.
LUK 20:10 When harvest time came, he sent a slave to the tenants so that they would give him his portion of the crop. However, the tenants beat his slave and sent him away empty-handed.
LUK 20:11 So he sent another slave. They beat this one too, treated him outrageously, and sent him away empty-handed.
LUK 20:12 So he sent still a third. They even wounded this one, and threw him out.
LUK 20:13 Then the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my one dear son; perhaps they will respect him.’
LUK 20:14 But when the tenants saw him, they said to one another, ‘This is the heir; let’s kill him so the inheritance will be ours!’
LUK 20:15 So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
LUK 20:16 He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others.” When the people heard this, they said, “May this never happen!”
LUK 20:17 But Jesus looked straight at them and said, “Then what is the meaning of that which is written: ‘ The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?
LUK 20:18 Everyone who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, and the one on whom it falls will be crushed.”
LUK 20:19 Then the experts in the law and the chief priests wanted to arrest him that very hour, because they realized he had told this parable against them. But they were afraid of the people.
LUK 20:20 Then they watched him carefully and sent spies who pretended to be sincere. They wanted to take advantage of what he might say so that they could deliver him up to the authority and jurisdiction of the governor.
LUK 20:21 Thus they asked him, “Teacher, we know that you speak and teach correctly, and show no partiality, but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth.
LUK 20:22 Is it right for us to pay the tribute tax to Caesar or not?”
LUK 20:23 But Jesus perceived their deceit and said to them,
LUK 20:24 “Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription are on it?” They said, “Caesar’s.”
LUK 20:25 So he said to them, “Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”
LUK 20:26 Thus they were unable in the presence of the people to trap him with his own words. And stunned by his answer, they fell silent.
LUK 20:27 Now some Sadducees (who contend that there is no resurrection) came to him.
LUK 20:28 They asked him, “Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies leaving a wife but no children, that man must marry the widow and father children for his brother*.
LUK 20:29 Now there were seven brothers. The first one married a woman and died without children.
LUK 20:30 The second
LUK 20:31 and then the third married her, and in this same way all seven died, leaving no children.
LUK 20:32 Finally the woman died too.
LUK 20:33 In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife will the woman be? For all seven had married her.”
LUK 20:34 So Jesus said to them, “The people of this age marry and are given in marriage.
LUK 20:35 But those who are regarded as worthy to share in that age and in the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage.
LUK 20:36 In fact, they can no longer die, because they are equal to angels and are sons of God, since they are sons of the resurrection.
LUK 20:37 But even Moses revealed that the dead are raised in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.
LUK 20:38 Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live before him.”
LUK 20:39 Then some of the experts in the law answered, “Teacher, you have spoken well!”
LUK 20:40 For they did not dare any longer to ask him anything.
LUK 20:41 But he said to them, “How is it that they say that the Christ is David’s son?
LUK 20:42 For David himself says in the book of Psalms, ‘ The Lord said to my lord, “ Sit at my right hand,
LUK 20:43 until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
LUK 20:44 If David then calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?”
LUK 20:45 As all the people were listening, Jesus said to his disciples,
LUK 20:46 “Beware of the experts in the law. They like walking around in long robes, and they love elaborate greetings in the marketplaces and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
LUK 20:47 They devour widows’ property, and as a show make long prayers. They will receive a more severe punishment.”
LUK 21:1 Jesus looked up and saw the rich putting their gifts into the offering box.
LUK 21:2 He also saw a poor widow put in two small copper coins.
LUK 21:3 He said, “I tell you the truth, this poor widow has put in more than all of them.
LUK 21:4 For they all offered their gifts out of their wealth. But she, out of her poverty, put in everything she had to live on.”
LUK 21:5 Now while some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned with beautiful stones and offerings, Jesus said,
LUK 21:6 “As for these things that you are gazing at, the days will come when not one stone will be left on another. All will be torn down!”
LUK 21:7 So they asked him, “Teacher, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that these things are about to take place?”
LUK 21:8 He said, “Watch out that you are not misled. For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The time is near.’ Do not follow them!
LUK 21:9 And when you hear of wars and rebellions, do not be afraid. For these things must happen first, but the end will not come at once.”
LUK 21:10 Then he said to them, “Nation will rise up in arms against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
LUK 21:11 There will be great earthquakes, and famines and plagues in various places, and there will be terrifying sights and great signs from heaven.
LUK 21:12 But before all this, they will seize you and persecute you, handing you over to the synagogues and prisons. You will be brought before kings and governors because of my name.
LUK 21:13 This will be a time for you to serve as witnesses.
LUK 21:14 Therefore be resolved not to rehearse ahead of time how to make your defense.
LUK 21:15 For I will give you the words along with the wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to withstand or contradict.
LUK 21:16 You will be betrayed even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends, and they will have some of you put to death.
LUK 21:17 You will be hated by everyone because of my name.
LUK 21:18 Yet not a hair of your head will perish.
LUK 21:19 By your endurance you will gain your lives.
LUK 21:20 “But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation has come near.
LUK 21:21 Then those who are in Judea must flee to the mountains. Those who are inside the city must depart. Those who are out in the country must not enter it,
LUK 21:22 because these are days of vengeance, to fulfill all that is written.
LUK 21:23 Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing their babies in those days! For there will be great distress on the earth and wrath against this people.
LUK 21:24 They will fall by the edge of the sword and be led away as captives among all nations. Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
LUK 21:25 “And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth nations will be in distress, anxious over the roaring of the sea and the surging waves.
LUK 21:26 People will be fainting from fear and from the expectation of what is coming on the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
LUK 21:27 Then they will see the Son of Man arriving in a cloud with power and great glory.
LUK 21:28 But when these things begin to happen, stand up and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near.”
LUK 21:29 Then he told them a parable: “Look at the fig tree and all the other trees.
LUK 21:30 When they sprout leaves, you see for yourselves and know that summer is now near.
LUK 21:31 So also you, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near.
LUK 21:32 I tell you the truth, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place.
LUK 21:33 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
LUK 21:34 “But be on your guard so that your hearts are not weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and the worries of this life, and that day close down upon you suddenly like a trap.
LUK 21:35 For it will overtake all who live on the face of the whole earth.
LUK 21:36 But stay alert at all times, praying that you may have strength to escape all these things that must happen, and to stand before the Son of Man.”
LUK 21:37 So every day Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, but at night he went and stayed on the Mount of Olives.
LUK 21:38 And all the people came to him early in the morning to listen to him in the temple courts.
LUK 22:1 Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which is called the Passover, was approaching.
LUK 22:2 The chief priests and the experts in the law were trying to find some way to execute Jesus, for they were afraid of the people.
LUK 22:3 Then Satan entered Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was one of the twelve.
LUK 22:4 He went away and discussed with the chief priests and officers of the temple guard how he might betray Jesus, handing him over to them.
LUK 22:5 They were delighted and arranged to give him money.
LUK 22:6 So Judas agreed and began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus when no crowd was present.
LUK 22:7 Then the day for the feast of Unleavened Bread came, on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
LUK 22:8 Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and prepare the Passover for us to eat.”
LUK 22:9 They said to him, “Where do you want us to prepare it?”
LUK 22:10 He said to them, “Listen, when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters,
LUK 22:11 and tell the owner of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
LUK 22:12 Then he will show you a large furnished room upstairs. Make preparations there.”
LUK 22:13 So they went and found things just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
LUK 22:14 Now when the hour came, Jesus took his place at the table and the apostles joined him.
LUK 22:15 And he said to them, “I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
LUK 22:16 For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
LUK 22:17 Then he took a cup, and after giving thanks he said, “Take this and divide it among yourselves.
LUK 22:18 For I tell you that from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.”
LUK 22:19 Then he took bread, and after giving thanks he broke it and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.”
LUK 22:20 And in the same way he took the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood.
LUK 22:21 “But look, the hand of the one who betrays me is with me on the table.
LUK 22:22 For the Son of Man is to go just as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!”
LUK 22:23 So they began to question one another as to which of them it could possibly be who would do this.
LUK 22:24 A dispute also started among them over which of them was to be regarded as the greatest.
LUK 22:25 So Jesus said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those in authority over them are called ‘benefactors.’
LUK 22:26 Not so with you; instead the one who is greatest among you must become like the youngest, and the leader like the one who serves.
LUK 22:27 For who is greater, the one who is seated at the table, or the one who serves? Is it not the one who is seated at the table? But I am among you as one who serves.
LUK 22:28 “You are the ones who have remained with me in my trials.
LUK 22:29 Thus I grant to you a kingdom, just as my Father granted to me,
LUK 22:30 that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and you will sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
LUK 22:31 “Simon, Simon, pay attention! Satan has demanded to have you all, to sift you like wheat,
LUK 22:32 but I have prayed for you, Simon, that your faith may not fail. When you have turned back, strengthen your brothers.”
LUK 22:33 But Peter said to him, “Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death!”
LUK 22:34 Jesus replied, “I tell you, Peter, the rooster will not crow today until you have denied three times that you know me.”
LUK 22:35 Then Jesus said to them, “When I sent you out with no money bag, or traveler’s bag, or sandals, you didn’t lack anything, did you?” They replied, “Nothing.”
LUK 22:36 He said to them, “But now, the one who has a money bag must take it, and likewise a traveler’s bag too. And the one who has no sword must sell his cloak and buy one.
LUK 22:37 For I tell you that this scripture must be fulfilled in me, ‘ And he was counted with the transgressors.’ For what is written about me is being fulfilled.”
LUK 22:38 So they said, “Look, Lord, here are two swords.” Then he told them, “It is enough.”
LUK 22:39 Then Jesus went out and made his way, as he customarily did, to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples followed him.
LUK 22:40 When he came to the place, he said to them, “Pray that you will not fall into temptation.”
LUK 22:41 He went away from them about a stone’s throw, knelt down, and prayed,
LUK 22:42 “Father, if you are willing, take this cup away from me. Yet not my will but yours be done.”
LUK 22:43 [Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
LUK 22:44 And in his anguish he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood falling to the ground.]
LUK 22:45 When he got up from prayer, he came to the disciples and found them sleeping, exhausted from grief.
LUK 22:46 So he said to them, “Why are you sleeping? Get up and pray that you will not fall into temptation!”
LUK 22:47 While he was still speaking, suddenly a crowd appeared, and the man named Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He walked up to Jesus to kiss him.
LUK 22:48 But Jesus said to him, “Judas, would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?”
LUK 22:49 When those who were around him saw what was about to happen, they said, “Lord, should we use our swords?”
LUK 22:50 Then one of them struck the high priest’s slave, cutting off his right ear.
LUK 22:51 But Jesus said, “Enough of this!” And he touched the man’s ear and healed him.
LUK 22:52 Then Jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, and the elders who had come out to get him, “Have you come out with swords and clubs like you would against an outlaw?
LUK 22:53 Day after day when I was with you in the temple courts, you did not arrest me. But this is your hour, and that of the power of darkness!”
LUK 22:54 Then they arrested Jesus, led him away, and brought him into the high priest’s house. But Peter was following at a distance.
LUK 22:55 When they had made a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat down among them.
LUK 22:56 Then a slave girl, seeing him as he sat in the firelight, stared at him and said, “This man was with him too!”
LUK 22:57 But Peter denied it: “Woman, I don’t know him!”
LUK 22:58 Then a little later someone else saw him and said, “You are one of them too.” But Peter said, “Man, I am not!”
LUK 22:59 And after about an hour still another insisted, “Certainly this man was with him, because he too is a Galilean.”
LUK 22:60 But Peter said, “Man, I don’t know what you’re talking about!” At that moment, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
LUK 22:61 Then the Lord turned and looked straight at Peter, and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said to him, “Before a rooster crows today, you will deny me three times.”
LUK 22:62 And he went outside and wept bitterly.
LUK 22:63 Now the men who were holding Jesus under guard began to mock him and beat him.
LUK 22:64 They blindfolded him and asked him repeatedly, “Prophesy! Who hit you?”
LUK 22:65 They also said many other things against him, reviling him.
LUK 22:66 When day came, the council of the elders of the people gathered together, both the chief priests and the experts in the law. Then they led Jesus away to their council
LUK 22:67 and said, “If you are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them, “If I tell you, you will not believe,
LUK 22:68 and if I ask you, you will not answer.
LUK 22:69 But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.”
LUK 22:70 So they all said, “Are you the Son of God, then?” He answered them, “You say that I am.”
LUK 22:71 Then they said, “Why do we need further testimony? We have heard it ourselves from his own lips!”
LUK 23:1 Then the whole group of them rose up and brought Jesus before Pilate.
LUK 23:2 They began to accuse him, saying, “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding us to pay the tribute tax to Caesar and claiming that he himself is Christ, a king.”
LUK 23:3 So Pilate asked Jesus, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He replied, “You say so.”
LUK 23:4 Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, “I find no basis for an accusation against this man.”
LUK 23:5 But they persisted in saying, “He incites the people by teaching throughout all Judea. It started in Galilee and ended up here!”
LUK 23:6 Now when Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was a Galilean.
LUK 23:7 When he learned that he was from Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him over to Herod, who also happened to be in Jerusalem at that time.
LUK 23:8 When Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he had long desired to see him, because he had heard about him and was hoping to see him perform some miraculous sign.
LUK 23:9 So Herod questioned him at considerable length; Jesus gave him no answer.
LUK 23:10 The chief priests and the experts in the law were there, vehemently accusing him.
LUK 23:11 Even Herod with his soldiers treated him with contempt and mocked him. Then, dressing him in elegant clothes, Herod sent him back to Pilate.
LUK 23:12 That very day Herod and Pilate became friends with each other, for prior to this they had been enemies.
LUK 23:13 Then Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people,
LUK 23:14 and said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was misleading the people. When I examined him before you, I did not find this man guilty of anything you accused him of doing.
LUK 23:15 Neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us. Look, he has done nothing deserving death.
LUK 23:16 I will therefore have him flogged and release him.”
LUK 23:17 
LUK 23:18 But they all shouted out together, “Take this man away! Release Barabbas for us!”
LUK 23:19 (This was a man who had been thrown into prison for an insurrection started in the city, and for murder.)
LUK 23:20 Pilate addressed them once again because he wanted to release Jesus.
LUK 23:21 But they kept on shouting, “Crucify, crucify him!”
LUK 23:22 A third time he said to them, “Why? What wrong has he done? I have found him guilty of no crime deserving death. I will therefore flog him and release him.”
LUK 23:23 But they were insistent, demanding with loud shouts that he be crucified. And their shouts prevailed.
LUK 23:24 So Pilate decided that their demand should be granted.
LUK 23:25 He released the man they asked for, who had been thrown in prison for insurrection and murder. But he handed Jesus over to their will.
LUK 23:26 As they led him away, they seized Simon of Cyrene, who was coming in from the country. They placed the cross on his back and made him carry it behind Jesus.
LUK 23:27 A great number of the people followed him, among them women who were mourning and wailing for him.
LUK 23:28 But Jesus turned to them and said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
LUK 23:29 For this is certain: The days are coming when they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore children, and the breasts that never nursed!’
LUK 23:30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us!’
LUK 23:31 For if such things are done when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?”
LUK 23:32 Two other criminals were also led away to be executed with him.
LUK 23:33 So when they came to the place that is called “The Skull,” they crucified him there, along with the criminals, one on his right and one on his left.
LUK 23:34 [But Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they don’t know what they are doing.”] Then they threw dice to divide his clothes.
LUK 23:35 The people also stood there watching, but the rulers ridiculed him, saying, “He saved others. Let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, his chosen one!”
LUK 23:36 The soldiers also mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine,
LUK 23:37 and saying, “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself!”
LUK 23:38 There was also an inscription over him, “This is the king of the Jews.”
LUK 23:39 One of the criminals who was hanging there railed at him, saying, “Aren’t you the Christ? Save yourself and us!”
LUK 23:40 But the other rebuked him, saying, “Don’t you fear God, since you are under the same sentence of condemnation?
LUK 23:41 And we rightly so, for we are getting what we deserve for what we did, but this man has done nothing wrong.”
LUK 23:42 Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come in your kingdom.”
LUK 23:43 And Jesus said to him, “I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise.”
LUK 23:44 It was now about noon, and darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon,
LUK 23:45 because the sun’s light failed. The temple curtain was torn in two.
LUK 23:46 Then Jesus, calling out with a loud voice, said, “Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!” And after he said this he breathed his last.
LUK 23:47 Now when the centurion saw what had happened, he praised God and said, “Certainly this man was innocent!”
LUK 23:48 And all the crowds that had assembled for this spectacle, when they saw what had taken place, returned home beating their breasts.
LUK 23:49 And all those who knew Jesus stood at a distance, and the women who had followed him from Galilee saw these things.
LUK 23:50 Now there was a man named Joseph who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man.
LUK 23:51 (He had not consented to their plan and action.) He was from the Judean town of Arimathea, and was looking forward to the kingdom of God.
LUK 23:52 He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
LUK 23:53 Then he took it down, wrapped it in a linen cloth, and placed it in a tomb cut out of the rock, where no one had yet been buried.
LUK 23:54 It was the day of preparation and the Sabbath was beginning.
LUK 23:55 The women who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee followed, and they saw the tomb and how his body was laid in it.
LUK 23:56 Then they returned and prepared aromatic spices and perfumes. On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
LUK 24:1 Now on the first day of the week, at early dawn, the women went to the tomb, taking the aromatic spices they had prepared.
LUK 24:2 They found that the stone had been rolled away from the tomb,
LUK 24:3 but when they went in, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
LUK 24:4 While they were perplexed about this, suddenly two men stood beside them in dazzling attire.
LUK 24:5 The women were terribly frightened and bowed their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, “Why do you look for the living among the dead?
LUK 24:6 He is not here, but has been raised! Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee,
LUK 24:7 that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again.”
LUK 24:8 Then the women remembered his words,
LUK 24:9 and when they returned from the tomb they told all these things to the eleven and to all the rest.
LUK 24:10 Now it was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them who told these things to the apostles.
LUK 24:11 But these words seemed like pure nonsense to them, and they did not believe them.
LUK 24:12 But Peter got up and ran to the tomb. He bent down and saw only the strips of linen cloth; then he went home, wondering what had happened.
LUK 24:13 Now that very day two of them were on their way to a village called Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem.
LUK 24:14 They were talking to each other about all the things that had happened.
LUK 24:15 While they were talking and debating these things, Jesus himself approached and began to accompany them
LUK 24:16 (but their eyes were kept from recognizing him).
LUK 24:17 Then he said to them, “What are these matters you are discussing so intently as you walk along?” And they stood still, looking sad.
LUK 24:18 Then one of them, named Cleopas, answered him, “Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who doesn’t know the things that have happened there in these days?”
LUK 24:19 He said to them, “What things?” “The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene,” they replied, “a man who, with his powerful deeds and words, proved to be a prophet before God and all the people;
LUK 24:20 and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to be condemned to death, and crucified him.
LUK 24:21 But we had hoped that he was the one who was going to redeem Israel. Not only this, but it is now the third day since these things happened.
LUK 24:22 Furthermore, some women of our group amazed us. They were at the tomb early this morning,
LUK 24:23 and when they did not find his body, they came back and said they had seen a vision of angels, who said he was alive.
LUK 24:24 Then some of those who were with us went to the tomb, and found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
LUK 24:25 So he said to them, “You foolish people – how slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
LUK 24:26 Wasn’t it necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and enter into his glory?”
LUK 24:27 Then beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them the things written about himself in all the scriptures.
LUK 24:28 So they approached the village where they were going. He acted as though he wanted to go farther,
LUK 24:29 but they urged him, “Stay with us, because it is getting toward evening and the day is almost done.” So he went in to stay with them.
LUK 24:30 When he had taken his place at the table with them, he took the bread, blessed and broke it, and gave it to them.
LUK 24:31 At this point their eyes were opened and they recognized him. Then he vanished out of their sight.
LUK 24:32 They said to each other, “Didn’t our hearts burn within us while he was speaking with us on the road, while he was explaining the scriptures to us?”
LUK 24:33 So they got up that very hour and returned to Jerusalem. They found the eleven and those with them gathered together
LUK 24:34 and saying, “The Lord has really risen, and has appeared to Simon!”
LUK 24:35 Then they told what had happened on the road, and how they recognized him when he broke the bread.
LUK 24:36 While they were saying these things, Jesus himself stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
LUK 24:37 But they were startled and terrified, thinking they saw a ghost.
LUK 24:38 Then he said to them, “Why are you frightened, and why do doubts arise in your hearts?
LUK 24:39 Look at my hands and my feet; it’s me! Touch me and see; a ghost does not have flesh and bones like you see I have.”
LUK 24:40 When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
LUK 24:41 And while they still could not believe it (because of their joy) and were amazed, he said to them, “Do you have anything here to eat?”
LUK 24:42 So they gave him a piece of broiled fish,
LUK 24:43 and he took it and ate it in front of them.
LUK 24:44 Then he said to them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and the psalms must be fulfilled.”
LUK 24:45 Then he opened their minds so they could understand the scriptures,
LUK 24:46 and said to them, “Thus it stands written that the Christ would suffer and would rise from the dead on the third day,
LUK 24:47 and repentance for the forgiveness of sins would be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem.
LUK 24:48 You are witnesses of these things.
LUK 24:49 And look, I am sending you what my Father promised. But stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high.”
LUK 24:50 Then Jesus led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he blessed them.
LUK 24:51 Now during the blessing he departed and was taken up into heaven.
LUK 24:52 So they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
LUK 24:53 and were continually in the temple courts blessing God.
JOH 1:1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was fully God.
JOH 1:2 The Word was with God in the beginning.
JOH 1:3 All things were created by him, and apart from him not one thing was created that has been created.
JOH 1:4 In him was life, and the life was the light of mankind.
JOH 1:5 And the light shines on in the darkness, but the darkness has not mastered it.
JOH 1:6 A man came, sent from God, whose name was John.
JOH 1:7 He came as a witness to testify about the light, so that everyone might believe through him.
JOH 1:8 He himself was not the light, but he came to testify about the light.
JOH 1:9 The true light, who gives light to everyone, was coming into the world.
JOH 1:10 He was in the world, and the world was created by him, but the world did not recognize him.
JOH 1:11 He came to what was his own, but his own people did not receive him.
JOH 1:12 But to all who have received him – those who believe in his name – he has given the right to become God’s children
JOH 1:13 – children not born by human parents or by human desire or a husband’s decision, but by God.
JOH 1:14 Now the Word became flesh and took up residence among us. We saw his glory – the glory of the one and only, full of grace and truth, who came from the Father.
JOH 1:15 John testified about him and shouted out, “This one was the one about whom I said, ‘He who comes after me is greater than I am, because he existed before me.’”
JOH 1:16 For we have all received from his fullness one gracious gift after another.
JOH 1:17 For the law was given through Moses, but grace and truth came about through Jesus Christ.
JOH 1:18 No one has ever seen God. The only one, himself God, who is in closest fellowship with the Father, has made God known.
JOH 1:19 Now this was John’s testimony when the Jewish leaders sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, “Who are you?”
JOH 1:20 He confessed – he did not deny but confessed – “I am not the Christ!”
JOH 1:21 So they asked him, “Then who are you? Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not!” “Are you the Prophet?” He answered, “No!”
JOH 1:22 Then they said to him, “Who are you? Tell us so that we can give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?”
JOH 1:23 John said, “I am the voice of one shouting in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way for the Lord,’ as Isaiah the prophet said.”
JOH 1:24 (Now they had been sent from the Pharisees. )
JOH 1:25 So they asked John, “Why then are you baptizing if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?”
JOH 1:26 John answered them, “I baptize with water. Among you stands one whom you do not recognize,
JOH 1:27 who is coming after me. I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandal!”
JOH 1:28 These things happened in Bethany across the Jordan River where John was baptizing.
JOH 1:29 On the next day John saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Look, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
JOH 1:30 This is the one about whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who is greater than I am, because he existed before me.’
JOH 1:31 I did not recognize him, but I came baptizing with water so that he could be revealed to Israel.”
JOH 1:32 Then John testified, “I saw the Spirit descending like a dove from heaven, and it remained on him.
JOH 1:33 And I did not recognize him, but the one who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘The one on whom you see the Spirit descending and remaining – this is the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’
JOH 1:34 I have both seen and testified that this man is the Chosen One of God.”
JOH 1:35 Again the next day John was standing there with two of his disciples.
JOH 1:36 Gazing at Jesus as he walked by, he said, “Look, the Lamb of God!”
JOH 1:37 When John’s two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
JOH 1:38 Jesus turned around and saw them following and said to them, “What do you want?” So they said to him, “Rabbi” (which is translated Teacher), “where are you staying?”
JOH 1:39 Jesus answered, “Come and you will see.” So they came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. Now it was about four o’clock in the afternoon.
JOH 1:40 Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two disciples who heard what John said and followed Jesus.
JOH 1:41 He first found his own brother Simon and told him, “We have found the Messiah!” (which is translated Christ).
JOH 1:42 Andrew brought Simon to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, “You are Simon, the son of John. You will be called Cephas” (which is translated Peter).
JOH 1:43 On the next day Jesus wanted to set out for Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, “Follow me.”
JOH 1:44 (Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the town of Andrew and Peter.)
JOH 1:45 Philip found Nathanael and told him, “We have found the one Moses wrote about in the law, and the prophets also wrote about – Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
JOH 1:46 Nathanael replied, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip replied, “Come and see.”
JOH 1:47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and exclaimed, “Look, a true Israelite in whom there is no deceit!”
JOH 1:48 Nathanael asked him, “How do you know me?” Jesus replied, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”
JOH 1:49 Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the king of Israel!”
JOH 1:50 Jesus said to him, “Because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree, do you believe? You will see greater things than these.”
JOH 1:51 He continued, “I tell all of you the solemn truth – you will see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”
JOH 2:1 Now on the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee. Jesus’ mother was there,
JOH 2:2 and Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the wedding.
JOH 2:3 When the wine ran out, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no wine left.”
JOH 2:4 Jesus replied, “Woman, why are you saying this to me? My time has not yet come.”
JOH 2:5 His mother told the servants, “Whatever he tells you, do it.”
JOH 2:6 Now there were six stone water jars there for Jewish ceremonial washing, each holding twenty or thirty gallons.
JOH 2:7 Jesus told the servants, “Fill the water jars with water.” So they filled them up to the very top.
JOH 2:8 Then he told them, “Now draw some out and take it to the head steward,” and they did.
JOH 2:9 When the head steward tasted the water that had been turned to wine, not knowing where it came from (though the servants who had drawn the water knew), he called the bridegroom
JOH 2:10 and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and then the cheaper wine when the guests are drunk. You have kept the good wine until now!”
JOH 2:11 Jesus did this as the first of his miraculous signs, in Cana of Galilee. In this way he revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him.
JOH 2:12 After this he went down to Capernaum with his mother and brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there a few days.
JOH 2:13 Now the Jewish feast of Passover was near, so Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
JOH 2:14 He found in the temple courts those who were selling oxen and sheep and doves, and the money changers sitting at tables.
JOH 2:15 So he made a whip of cords and drove them all out of the temple courts, with the sheep and the oxen. He scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
JOH 2:16 To those who sold the doves he said, “Take these things away from here! Do not make my Father’s house a marketplace!”
JOH 2:17 His disciples remembered that it was written, “ Zeal for your house will devour me.”
JOH 2:18 So then the Jewish leaders responded, “What sign can you show us, since you are doing these things?”
JOH 2:19 Jesus replied, “Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up again.”
JOH 2:20 Then the Jewish leaders said to him, “This temple has been under construction for forty-six years, and are you going to raise it up in three days?”
JOH 2:21 But Jesus was speaking about the temple of his body.
JOH 2:22 So after he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the scripture and the saying that Jesus had spoken.
JOH 2:23 Now while Jesus was in Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover, many people believed in his name because they saw the miraculous signs he was doing.
JOH 2:24 But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people.
JOH 2:25 He did not need anyone to testify about man, for he knew what was in man.
JOH 3:1 Now a certain man, a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who was a member of the Jewish ruling council,
JOH 3:2 came to Jesus at night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God. For no one could perform the miraculous signs that you do unless God is with him.”
JOH 3:3 Jesus replied, “I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”
JOH 3:4 Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter his mother’s womb and be born a second time, can he?”
JOH 3:5 Jesus answered, “I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born of water and spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.
JOH 3:6 What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit is spirit.
JOH 3:7 Do not be amazed that I said to you, ‘You must all be born from above.’
JOH 3:8 The wind blows wherever it will, and you hear the sound it makes, but do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.”
JOH 3:9 Nicodemus replied, “How can these things be?”
JOH 3:10 Jesus answered, “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you don’t understand these things?
JOH 3:11 I tell you the solemn truth, we speak about what we know and testify about what we have seen, but you people do not accept our testimony.
JOH 3:12 If I have told you people about earthly things and you don’t believe, how will you believe if I tell you about heavenly things?
JOH 3:13 No one has ascended into heaven except the one who descended from heaven – the Son of Man.
JOH 3:14 Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
JOH 3:15 so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.”
JOH 3:16 For this is the way God loved the world: He gave his one and only Son, so that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have eternal life.
JOH 3:17 For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world should be saved through him.
JOH 3:18 The one who believes in him is not condemned. The one who does not believe has been condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God.
JOH 3:19 Now this is the basis for judging: that the light has come into the world and people loved the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil.
JOH 3:20 For everyone who does evil deeds hates the light and does not come to the light, so that their deeds will not be exposed.
JOH 3:21 But the one who practices the truth comes to the light, so that it may be plainly evident that his deeds have been done in God.
JOH 3:22 After this, Jesus and his disciples came into Judean territory, and there he spent time with them and was baptizing.
JOH 3:23 John was also baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because water was plentiful there, and people were coming to him and being baptized.
JOH 3:24 (For John had not yet been thrown into prison.)
JOH 3:25 Now a dispute came about between some of John’s disciples and a certain Jew concerning ceremonial washing.
JOH 3:26 So they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, the one who was with you on the other side of the Jordan River, about whom you testified – see, he is baptizing, and everyone is flocking to him!”
JOH 3:27 John replied, “No one can receive anything unless it has been given to him from heaven.
JOH 3:28 You yourselves can testify that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but rather, ‘I have been sent before him.’
JOH 3:29 The one who has the bride is the bridegroom. The friend of the bridegroom, who stands by and listens for him, rejoices greatly when he hears the bridegroom’s voice. This then is my joy, and it is complete.
JOH 3:30 He must become more important while I become less important.”
JOH 3:31 The one who comes from above is superior to all. The one who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks about earthly things. The one who comes from heaven is superior to all.
JOH 3:32 He testifies about what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony.
JOH 3:33 The one who has accepted his testimony has confirmed clearly that God is truthful.
JOH 3:34 For the one whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for he does not give the Spirit sparingly.
JOH 3:35 The Father loves the Son and has placed all things under his authority.
JOH 3:36 The one who believes in the Son has eternal life. The one who rejects the Son will not see life, but God’s wrath remains on him.
JOH 4:1 Now when Jesus knew that the Pharisees had heard that he was winning and baptizing more disciples than John
JOH 4:2 (although Jesus himself was not baptizing, but his disciples were),
JOH 4:3 he left Judea and set out once more for Galilee.
JOH 4:4 But he had to pass through Samaria.
JOH 4:5 Now he came to a Samaritan town called Sychar, near the plot of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
JOH 4:6 Jacob’s well was there, so Jesus, since he was tired from the journey, sat right down beside the well. It was about noon.
JOH 4:7 A Samaritan woman came to draw water. Jesus said to her, “Give me some water to drink.”
JOH 4:8 (For his disciples had gone off into the town to buy supplies. )
JOH 4:9 So the Samaritan woman said to him, “How can you – a Jew – ask me, a Samaritan woman, for water to drink?” (For Jews use nothing in common with Samaritans.)
JOH 4:10 Jesus answered her, “If you had known the gift of God and who it is who said to you, ‘Give me some water to drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”
JOH 4:11 “Sir,” the woman said to him, “you have no bucket and the well is deep; where then do you get this living water?
JOH 4:12 Surely you’re not greater than our ancestor Jacob, are you? For he gave us this well and drank from it himself, along with his sons and his livestock.”
JOH 4:13 Jesus replied, “Everyone who drinks some of this water will be thirsty again.
JOH 4:14 But whoever drinks some of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again, but the water that I will give him will become in him a fountain of water springing up to eternal life.”
JOH 4:15 The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water, so that I will not be thirsty or have to come here to draw water.”
JOH 4:16 He said to her, “Go call your husband and come back here.”
JOH 4:17 The woman replied, “I have no husband.” Jesus said to her, “Right you are when you said, ‘I have no husband,’
JOH 4:18 for you have had five husbands, and the man you are living with now is not your husband. This you said truthfully!”
JOH 4:19 The woman said to him, “Sir, I see that you are a prophet.
JOH 4:20 Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and you people say that the place where people must worship is in Jerusalem.”
JOH 4:21 Jesus said to her, “Believe me, woman, a time is coming when you will worship the Father neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem.
JOH 4:22 You people worship what you do not know. We worship what we know, because salvation is from the Jews.
JOH 4:23 But a time is coming – and now is here – when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such people to be his worshipers.
JOH 4:24 God is spirit, and the people who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.”
JOH 4:25 The woman said to him, “I know that Messiah is coming” (the one called Christ); “whenever he comes, he will tell us everything.”
JOH 4:26 Jesus said to her, “I, the one speaking to you, am he.”
JOH 4:27 Now at that very moment his disciples came back. They were shocked because he was speaking with a woman. However, no one said, “What do you want?” or “Why are you speaking with her?”
JOH 4:28 Then the woman left her water jar, went off into the town and said to the people,
JOH 4:29 “Come, see a man who told me everything I ever did. Surely he can’t be the Messiah, can he?”
JOH 4:30 So they left the town and began coming to him.
JOH 4:31 Meanwhile the disciples were urging him, “Rabbi, eat something.”
JOH 4:32 But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you know nothing about.”
JOH 4:33 So the disciples began to say to one another, “No one brought him anything to eat, did they?”
JOH 4:34 Jesus said to them, “My food is to do the will of the one who sent me and to complete his work.
JOH 4:35 Don’t you say, ‘There are four more months and then comes the harvest?’ I tell you, look up and see that the fields are already white for harvest!
JOH 4:36 The one who reaps receives pay and gathers fruit for eternal life, so that the one who sows and the one who reaps can rejoice together.
JOH 4:37 For in this instance the saying is true, ‘One sows and another reaps.’
JOH 4:38 I sent you to reap what you did not work for; others have labored and you have entered into their labor.”
JOH 4:39 Now many Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the report of the woman who testified, “He told me everything I ever did.”
JOH 4:40 So when the Samaritans came to him, they began asking him to stay with them. He stayed there two days,
JOH 4:41 and because of his word many more believed.
JOH 4:42 They said to the woman, “No longer do we believe because of your words, for we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this one really is the Savior of the world.”
JOH 4:43 After the two days he departed from there to Galilee.
JOH 4:44 (For Jesus himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country.)
JOH 4:45 So when he came to Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him because they had seen all the things he had done in Jerusalem at the feast (for they themselves had gone to the feast).
JOH 4:46 Now he came again to Cana there was a certain royal official whose son was sick.
JOH 4:47 When he heard that Jesus had come back from Judea to Galilee, he went to him and begged him to come down and heal his son, who was about to die.
JOH 4:48 So Jesus said to him, “Unless you people see signs and wonders you will never believe!”
JOH 4:49 “Sir,” the official said to him, “come down before my child dies.”
JOH 4:50 Jesus told him, “Go home; your son will live.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and set off for home.
JOH 4:51 While he was on his way down, his slaves met him and told him that his son was going to live.
JOH 4:52 So he asked them the time when his condition began to improve, and they told him, “Yesterday at one o’clock in the afternoon the fever left him.”
JOH 4:53 Then the father realized that it was the very time Jesus had said to him, “Your son will live,” and he himself believed along with his entire household.
JOH 4:54 Jesus did this as his second miraculous sign when he returned from Judea to Galilee.
JOH 5:1 After this there was a Jewish feast, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
JOH 5:2 Now there is in Jerusalem by the Sheep Gate a pool called Bethzatha in Aramaic, which has five covered walkways.
JOH 5:3 A great number of sick, blind, lame, and paralyzed people were lying in these walkways.
JOH 5:4 
JOH 5:5 Now a man was there who had been disabled for thirty-eight years.
JOH 5:6 When Jesus saw him lying there and when he realized that the man had been disabled a long time already, he said to him, “Do you want to become well?”
JOH 5:7 The sick man answered him, “Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up. While I am trying to get into the water, someone else goes down there before me.”
JOH 5:8 Jesus said to him, “Stand up! Pick up your mat and walk.”
JOH 5:9 Immediately the man was healed, and he picked up his mat and started walking. (Now that day was a Sabbath.)
JOH 5:10 So the Jewish leaders said to the man who had been healed, “It is the Sabbath, and you are not permitted to carry your mat.”
JOH 5:11 But he answered them, “The man who made me well said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’”
JOH 5:12 They asked him, “Who is the man who said to you, ‘Pick up your mat and walk’?”
JOH 5:13 But the man who had been healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had slipped out, since there was a crowd in that place.
JOH 5:14 After this Jesus found him at the temple and said to him, “Look, you have become well. Don’t sin any more, lest anything worse happen to you.”
JOH 5:15 The man went away and informed the Jewish leaders that Jesus was the one who had made him well.
JOH 5:16 Now because Jesus was doing these things on the Sabbath, the Jewish leaders began persecuting him.
JOH 5:17 So he told them, “My Father is working until now, and I too am working.”
JOH 5:18 For this reason the Jewish leaders were trying even harder to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was also calling God his own Father, thus making himself equal with God.
JOH 5:19 So Jesus answered them, “I tell you the solemn truth, the Son can do nothing on his own initiative, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father does, the Son does likewise.
JOH 5:20 For the Father loves the Son and shows him everything he does, and will show him greater deeds than these, so that you will be amazed.
JOH 5:21 For just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whomever he wishes.
JOH 5:22 Furthermore, the Father does not judge anyone, but has assigned all judgment to the Son,
JOH 5:23 so that all people will honor the Son just as they honor the Father. The one who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.
JOH 5:24 “I tell you the solemn truth, the one who hears my message and believes the one who sent me has eternal life and will not be condemned, but has crossed over from death to life.
JOH 5:25 I tell you the solemn truth, a time is coming – and is now here – when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.
JOH 5:26 For just as the Father has life in himself, thus he has granted the Son to have life in himself,
JOH 5:27 and he has granted the Son authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man.
JOH 5:28 “Do not be amazed at this, because a time is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice
JOH 5:29 and will come out – the ones who have done what is good to the resurrection resulting in life, and the ones who have done what is evil to the resurrection resulting in condemnation.
JOH 5:30 I can do nothing on my own initiative. Just as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I do not seek my own will, but the will of the one who sent me.
JOH 5:31 “If I testify about myself, my testimony is not true.
JOH 5:32 There is another who testifies about me, and I know the testimony he testifies about me is true.
JOH 5:33 You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
JOH 5:34 (I do not accept human testimony, but I say this so that you may be saved.)
JOH 5:35 He was a lamp that was burning and shining, and you wanted to rejoice greatly for a short time in his light.
JOH 5:36 “But I have a testimony greater than that from John. For the deeds that the Father has assigned me to complete – the deeds I am now doing – testify about me that the Father has sent me.
JOH 5:37 And the Father who sent me has himself testified about me. You people have never heard his voice nor seen his form at any time,
JOH 5:38 nor do you have his word residing in you, because you do not believe the one whom he sent.
JOH 5:39 You study the scriptures thoroughly because you think in them you possess eternal life, and it is these same scriptures that testify about me,
JOH 5:40 but you are not willing to come to me so that you may have life.
JOH 5:41 “I do not accept praise from people,
JOH 5:42 but I know you, that you do not have the love of God within you.
JOH 5:43 I have come in my Father’s name, and you do not accept me. If someone else comes in his own name, you will accept him.
JOH 5:44 How can you believe, if you accept praise from one another and don’t seek the praise that comes from the only God?
JOH 5:45 “Do not suppose that I will accuse you before the Father. The one who accuses you is Moses, in whom you have placed your hope.
JOH 5:46 If you believed Moses, you would believe me, because he wrote about me.
JOH 5:47 But if you do not believe what Moses wrote, how will you believe my words?”
JOH 6:1 After this Jesus went away to the other side of the Sea of Galilee (also called the Sea of Tiberias).
JOH 6:2 A large crowd was following him because they were observing the miraculous signs he was performing on the sick.
JOH 6:3 So Jesus went on up the mountainside and sat down there with his disciples.
JOH 6:4 (Now the Jewish feast of the Passover was near.)
JOH 6:5 Then Jesus, when he looked up and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, said to Philip, “Where can we buy bread so that these people may eat?”
JOH 6:6 (Now Jesus said this to test him, for he knew what he was going to do.)
JOH 6:7 Philip replied, “Two hundred silver coins worth of bread would not be enough for them, for each one to get a little.”
JOH 6:8 One of Jesus’ disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him,
JOH 6:9 “Here is a boy who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what good are these for so many people?”
JOH 6:10 Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.” (Now there was a lot of grass in that place.) So the men sat down, about five thousand in number.
JOH 6:11 Then Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed the bread to those who were seated. He then did the same with the fish, as much as they wanted.
JOH 6:12 When they were all satisfied, Jesus said to his disciples, “Gather up the broken pieces that are left over, so that nothing is wasted.”
JOH 6:13 So they gathered them up and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves left over by the people who had eaten.
JOH 6:14 Now when the people saw the miraculous sign that Jesus performed, they began to say to one another, “This is certainly the Prophet who is to come into the world.”
JOH 6:15 Then Jesus, because he knew they were going to come and seize him by force to make him king, withdrew again up the mountainside alone.
JOH 6:16 Now when evening came, his disciples went down to the lake,
JOH 6:17 got into a boat, and started to cross the lake to Capernaum. (It had already become dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them.)
JOH 6:18 By now a strong wind was blowing and the sea was getting rough.
JOH 6:19 Then, when they had rowed about three or four miles, they caught sight of Jesus walking on the lake, approaching the boat, and they were frightened.
JOH 6:20 But he said to them, “It is I. Do not be afraid.”
JOH 6:21 Then they wanted to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat came to the land where they had been heading.
JOH 6:22 The next day the crowd that remained on the other side of the lake realized that only one small boat had been there, and that Jesus had not boarded it with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone.
JOH 6:23 But some boats from Tiberias came to shore near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
JOH 6:24 So when the crowd realized that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and came to Capernaum looking for Jesus.
JOH 6:25 When they found him on the other side of the lake, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?”
JOH 6:26 Jesus replied, “I tell you the solemn truth, you are looking for me not because you saw miraculous signs, but because you ate all the loaves of bread you wanted.
JOH 6:27 Do not work for the food that disappears, but for the food that remains to eternal life – the food which the Son of Man will give to you. For God the Father has put his seal of approval on him.”
JOH 6:28 So then they said to him, “What must we do to accomplish the deeds God requires?”
JOH 6:29 Jesus replied, “This is the deed God requires – to believe in the one whom he sent.”
JOH 6:30 So they said to him, “Then what miraculous sign will you perform, so that we may see it and believe you? What will you do?
JOH 6:31 Our ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, ‘ He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”
JOH 6:32 Then Jesus told them, “I tell you the solemn truth, it is not Moses who has given you the bread from heaven, but my Father is giving you the true bread from heaven.
JOH 6:33 For the bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”
JOH 6:34 So they said to him, “Sir, give us this bread all the time!”
JOH 6:35 Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life. The one who comes to me will never go hungry, and the one who believes in me will never be thirsty.
JOH 6:36 But I told you that you have seen me and still do not believe.
JOH 6:37 Everyone whom the Father gives me will come to me, and the one who comes to me I will never send away.
JOH 6:38 For I have come down from heaven not to do my own will but the will of the one who sent me.
JOH 6:39 Now this is the will of the one who sent me – that I should not lose one person of every one he has given me, but raise them all up at the last day.
JOH 6:40 For this is the will of my Father – for everyone who looks on the Son and believes in him to have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.”
JOH 6:41 Then the Jews who were hostile to Jesus began complaining about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven,”
JOH 6:42 and they said, “Isn’t this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How can he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?”
JOH 6:43 Jesus replied, “Do not complain about me to one another.
JOH 6:44 No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up at the last day.
JOH 6:45 It is written in the prophets, ‘ And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who hears and learns from the Father comes to me.
JOH 6:46 (Not that anyone has seen the Father except the one who is from God – he has seen the Father.)
JOH 6:47 I tell you the solemn truth, the one who believes has eternal life.
JOH 6:48 I am the bread of life.
JOH 6:49 Your ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died.
JOH 6:50 This is the bread that has come down from heaven, so that a person may eat from it and not die.
JOH 6:51 I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats from this bread he will live forever. The bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.”
JOH 6:52 Then the Jews who were hostile to Jesus began to argue with one another, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?”
JOH 6:53 Jesus said to them, “I tell you the solemn truth, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in yourselves.
JOH 6:54 The one who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.
JOH 6:55 For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
JOH 6:56 The one who eats my flesh and drinks my blood resides in me, and I in him.
JOH 6:57 Just as the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so the one who consumes me will live because of me.
JOH 6:58 This is the bread that came down from heaven; it is not like the bread your ancestors ate, but then later died. The one who eats this bread will live forever.”
JOH 6:59 Jesus said these things while he was teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum.
JOH 6:60 Then many of his disciples, when they heard these things, said, “This is a difficult saying! Who can understand it?”
JOH 6:61 When Jesus was aware that his disciples were complaining about this, he said to them, “Does this cause you to be offended?
JOH 6:62 Then what if you see the Son of Man ascending where he was before?
JOH 6:63 The Spirit is the one who gives life; human nature is of no help! The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and are life.
JOH 6:64 But there are some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus had already known from the beginning who those were who did not believe, and who it was who would betray him.)
JOH 6:65 So Jesus added, “Because of this I told you that no one can come to me unless the Father has allowed him to come.”
JOH 6:66 After this many of his disciples quit following him and did not accompany him any longer.
JOH 6:67 So Jesus said to the twelve, “You don’t want to go away too, do you?”
JOH 6:68 Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life.
JOH 6:69 We have come to believe and to know that you are the Holy One of God!”
JOH 6:70 Jesus replied, “Didn’t I choose you, the twelve, and yet one of you is the devil?”
JOH 6:71 (Now he said this about Judas son of Simon Iscariot, for Judas, one of the twelve, was going to betray him.)
JOH 7:1 After this Jesus traveled throughout Galilee. He stayed out of Judea because the Jewish leaders wanted to kill him.
JOH 7:2 Now the Jewish feast of Tabernacles was near.
JOH 7:3 So Jesus’ brothers advised him, “Leave here and go to Judea so your disciples may see your miracles that you are performing.
JOH 7:4 For no one who seeks to make a reputation for himself does anything in secret. If you are doing these things, show yourself to the world.”
JOH 7:5 (For not even his own brothers believed in him.)
JOH 7:6 So Jesus replied, “My time has not yet arrived, but you are ready at any opportunity!
JOH 7:7 The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, because I am testifying about it that its deeds are evil.
JOH 7:8 You go up to the feast yourselves. I am not going up to this feast because my time has not yet fully arrived.”
JOH 7:9 When he had said this, he remained in Galilee.
JOH 7:10 But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then Jesus himself also went up, not openly but in secret.
JOH 7:11 So the Jewish leaders were looking for him at the feast, asking, “Where is he?”
JOH 7:12 There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds. Some were saying, “He is a good man,” but others, “He deceives the common people.”
JOH 7:13 However, no one spoke openly about him for fear of the Jewish leaders.
JOH 7:14 When the feast was half over, Jesus went up to the temple courts and began to teach.
JOH 7:15 Then the Jewish leaders were astonished and said, “How does this man know so much when he has never had formal instruction?”
JOH 7:16 So Jesus replied, “My teaching is not from me, but from the one who sent me.
JOH 7:17 If anyone wants to do God’s will, he will know about my teaching, whether it is from God or whether I speak from my own authority.
JOH 7:18 The person who speaks on his own authority desires to receive honor for himself; the one who desires the honor of the one who sent him is a man of integrity, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
JOH 7:19 Hasn’t Moses given you the law? Yet not one of you keeps the law! Why do you want to kill me?”
JOH 7:20 The crowd answered, “You’re possessed by a demon! Who is trying to kill you?”
JOH 7:21 Jesus replied, “I performed one miracle and you are all amazed.
JOH 7:22 However, because Moses gave you the practice of circumcision (not that it came from Moses, but from the forefathers), you circumcise a male child on the Sabbath.
JOH 7:23 But if a male child is circumcised on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses is not broken, why are you angry with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath?
JOH 7:24 Do not judge according to external appearance, but judge with proper judgment.”
JOH 7:25 Then some of the residents of Jerusalem began to say, “Isn’t this the man they are trying to kill?
JOH 7:26 Yet here he is, speaking publicly, and they are saying nothing to him. Do the rulers really know that this man is the Christ?
JOH 7:27 But we know where this man comes from. Whenever the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from.”
JOH 7:28 Then Jesus, while teaching in the temple courts, cried out, “You both know me and know where I come from! And I have not come on my own initiative, but the one who sent me is true. You do not know him,
JOH 7:29 but I know him, because I have come from him and he sent me.”
JOH 7:30 So then they tried to seize Jesus, but no one laid a hand on him, because his time had not yet come.
JOH 7:31 Yet many of the crowd believed in him and said, “Whenever the Christ comes, he won’t perform more miraculous signs than this man did, will he?”
JOH 7:32 The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about Jesus, so the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.
JOH 7:33 Then Jesus said, “I will be with you for only a little while longer, and then I am going to the one who sent me.
JOH 7:34 You will look for me but will not find me, and where I am you cannot come.”
JOH 7:35 Then the Jewish leaders said to one another, “Where is he going to go that we cannot find him? He is not going to go to the Jewish people dispersed among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, is he?
JOH 7:36 What did he mean by saying, ‘You will look for me but will not find me, and where I am you cannot come’?”
JOH 7:37 On the last day of the feast, the greatest day, Jesus stood up and shouted out, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me, and
JOH 7:38 let the one who believes in me drink. Just as the scripture says, ‘ From within him will flow rivers of living water.’”
JOH 7:39 (Now he said this about the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were going to receive, for the Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus was not yet glorified.)
JOH 7:40 When they heard these words, some of the crowd began to say, “This really is the Prophet!”
JOH 7:41 Others said, “This is the Christ!” But still others said, “No, for the Christ doesn’t come from Galilee, does he?
JOH 7:42 Don’t the scriptures say that the Christ is a descendant of David and comes from Bethlehem, the village where David lived?”
JOH 7:43 So there was a division in the crowd because of Jesus.
JOH 7:44 Some of them were wanting to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him.
JOH 7:45 Then the officers returned to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, “Why didn’t you bring him back with you?”
JOH 7:46 The officers replied, “No one ever spoke like this man!”
JOH 7:47 Then the Pharisees answered, “You haven’t been deceived too, have you?
JOH 7:48 None of the rulers or the Pharisees have believed in him, have they?
JOH 7:49 But this rabble who do not know the law are accursed!”
JOH 7:50 Nicodemus, who had gone to Jesus before and who was one of the rulers, said,
JOH 7:51 “Our law doesn’t condemn a man unless it first hears from him and learns what he is doing, does it?”
JOH 7:52 They replied, “You aren’t from Galilee too, are you? Investigate carefully and you will see that no prophet comes from Galilee!”
JOH 7:53 [[And each one departed to his own house.
JOH 8:1 But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
JOH 8:2 Early in the morning he came to the temple courts again. All the people came to him, and he sat down and began to teach them.
JOH 8:3 The experts in the law and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught committing adultery. They made her stand in front of them
JOH 8:4 and said to Jesus, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of adultery.
JOH 8:5 In the law Moses commanded us to stone to death such women. What then do you say?”
JOH 8:6 (Now they were asking this in an attempt to trap him, so that they could bring charges against him.) Jesus bent down and wrote on the ground with his finger.
JOH 8:7 When they persisted in asking him, he stood up straight and replied, “Whoever among you is guiltless may be the first to throw a stone at her.”
JOH 8:8 Then he bent over again and wrote on the ground.
JOH 8:9 Now when they heard this, they began to drift away one at a time, starting with the older ones, until Jesus was left alone with the woman standing before him.
JOH 8:10 Jesus stood up straight and said to her, “Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn you?”
JOH 8:11 She replied, “No one, Lord.” And Jesus said, “I do not condemn you either. Go, and from now on do not sin any more.”]]
JOH 8:12 Then Jesus spoke out again, “I am the light of the world. The one who follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
JOH 8:13 So the Pharisees objected, “You testify about yourself; your testimony is not true!”
JOH 8:14 Jesus answered, “Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is true, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you people do not know where I came from or where I am going.
JOH 8:15 You people judge by outward appearances; I do not judge anyone.
JOH 8:16 But if I judge, my evaluation is accurate, because I am not alone when I judge, but I and the Father who sent me do so together.
JOH 8:17 It is written in your law that the testimony of two men is true.
JOH 8:18 I testify about myself and the Father who sent me testifies about me.”
JOH 8:19 Then they began asking him, “Who is your father?” Jesus answered, “You do not know either me or my Father. If you knew me you would know my Father too.”
JOH 8:20 (Jesus spoke these words near the offering box while he was teaching in the temple courts. No one seized him because his time had not yet come.)
JOH 8:21 Then Jesus said to them again, “I am going away, and you will look for me but will die in your sin. Where I am going you cannot come.”
JOH 8:22 So the Jewish leaders began to say, “Perhaps he is going to kill himself, because he says, ‘Where I am going you cannot come.’”
JOH 8:23 Jesus replied, “You people are from below; I am from above. You people are from this world; I am not from this world.
JOH 8:24 Thus I told you that you will die in your sins. For unless you believe that I am he, you will die in your sins.”
JOH 8:25 So they said to him, “Who are you?” Jesus replied, “What I have told you from the beginning.
JOH 8:26 I have many things to say and to judge about you, but the Father who sent me is truthful, and the things I have heard from him I speak to the world.”
JOH 8:27 (They did not understand that he was telling them about his Father.)
JOH 8:28 Then Jesus said, “When you lift up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and I do nothing on my own initiative, but I speak just what the Father taught me.
JOH 8:29 And the one who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone, because I always do those things that please him.”
JOH 8:30 While he was saying these things, many people believed in him.
JOH 8:31 Then Jesus said to those Judeans who had believed him, “If you continue to follow my teaching, you are really my disciples
JOH 8:32 and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
JOH 8:33 “We are descendants of Abraham,” they replied, “and have never been anyone’s slaves! How can you say, ‘You will become free’?”
JOH 8:34 Jesus answered them, “I tell you the solemn truth, everyone who practices sin is a slave of sin.
JOH 8:35 The slave does not remain in the family forever, but the son remains forever.
JOH 8:36 So if the son sets you free, you will be really free.
JOH 8:37 I know that you are Abraham’s descendants. But you want to kill me, because my teaching makes no progress among you.
JOH 8:38 I am telling you the things I have seen while with the Father; as for you, practice the things you have heard from the Father!”
JOH 8:39 They answered him, “Abraham is our father!” Jesus replied, “If you are Abraham’s children, you would be doing the deeds of Abraham.
JOH 8:40 But now you are trying to kill me, a man who has told you the truth I heard from God. Abraham did not do this!
JOH 8:41 You people are doing the deeds of your father.” Then they said to Jesus, “We were not born as a result of immorality! We have only one Father, God himself.”
JOH 8:42 Jesus replied, “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I have come from God and am now here. I have not come on my own initiative, but he sent me.
JOH 8:43 Why don’t you understand what I am saying? It is because you cannot accept my teaching.
JOH 8:44 You people are from your father the devil, and you want to do what your father desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, and does not uphold the truth, because there is no truth in him. Whenever he lies, he speaks according to his own nature, because he is a liar and the father of lies.
JOH 8:45 But because I am telling you the truth, you do not believe me.
JOH 8:46 Who among you can prove me guilty of any sin? If I am telling you the truth, why don’t you believe me?
JOH 8:47 The one who belongs to God listens and responds to God’s words. You don’t listen and respond, because you don’t belong to God.”
JOH 8:48 The Judeans replied, “Aren’t we correct in saying that you are a Samaritan and are possessed by a demon?”
JOH 8:49 Jesus answered, “I am not possessed by a demon, but I honor my Father – and yet you dishonor me.
JOH 8:50 I am not trying to get praise for myself. There is one who demands it, and he also judges.
JOH 8:51 I tell you the solemn truth, if anyone obeys my teaching, he will never see death.”
JOH 8:52 Then the Judeans responded, “Now we know you’re possessed by a demon! Both Abraham and the prophets died, and yet you say, ‘If anyone obeys my teaching, he will never experience death.’
JOH 8:53 You aren’t greater than our father Abraham who died, are you? And the prophets died too! Who do you claim to be?”
JOH 8:54 Jesus replied, “If I glorify myself, my glory is worthless. The one who glorifies me is my Father, about whom you people say, ‘He is our God.’
JOH 8:55 Yet you do not know him, but I know him. If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you. But I do know him, and I obey his teaching.
JOH 8:56 Your father Abraham was overjoyed to see my day, and he saw it and was glad.”
JOH 8:57 Then the Judeans replied, “You are not yet fifty years old! Have you seen Abraham?”
JOH 8:58 Jesus said to them, “I tell you the solemn truth, before Abraham came into existence, I am!”
JOH 8:59 Then they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out from the temple area.
JOH 9:1 Now as Jesus was passing by, he saw a man who had been blind from birth.
JOH 9:2 His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who committed the sin that caused him to be born blind, this man or his parents?”
JOH 9:3 Jesus answered, “Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but he was born blind so that the acts of God may be revealed through what happens to him.
JOH 9:4 We must perform the deeds of the one who sent me as long as it is daytime. Night is coming when no one can work.
JOH 9:5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
JOH 9:6 Having said this, he spat on the ground and made some mud with the saliva. He smeared the mud on the blind man’s eyes
JOH 9:7 and said to him, “Go wash in the pool of Siloam” (which is translated “sent”). So the blind man went away and washed, and came back seeing.
JOH 9:8 Then the neighbors and the people who had seen him previously as a beggar began saying, “Is this not the man who used to sit and beg?”
JOH 9:9 Some people said, “This is the man!” while others said, “No, but he looks like him.” The man himself kept insisting, “I am the one!”
JOH 9:10 So they asked him, “How then were you made to see?”
JOH 9:11 He replied, “The man called Jesus made mud, smeared it on my eyes and told me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed, and was able to see.”
JOH 9:12 They said to him, “Where is that man?” He replied, “I don’t know.”
JOH 9:13 They brought the man who used to be blind to the Pharisees.
JOH 9:14 (Now the day on which Jesus made the mud and caused him to see was a Sabbath.)
JOH 9:15 So the Pharisees asked him again how he had gained his sight. He replied, “He put mud on my eyes and I washed, and now I am able to see.”
JOH 9:16 Then some of the Pharisees began to say, “This man is not from God, because he does not observe the Sabbath.” But others said, “How can a man who is a sinner perform such miraculous signs?” Thus there was a division among them.
JOH 9:17 So again they asked the man who used to be blind, “What do you say about him, since he caused you to see?” “He is a prophet,” the man replied.
JOH 9:18 Now the Jewish religious leaders refused to believe that he had really been blind and had gained his sight until at last they summoned the parents of the man who had become able to see.
JOH 9:19 They asked the parents, “Is this your son, whom you say was born blind? Then how does he now see?”
JOH 9:20 So his parents replied, “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
JOH 9:21 But we do not know how he is now able to see, nor do we know who caused him to see. Ask him, he is a mature adult. He will speak for himself.”
JOH 9:22 (His parents said these things because they were afraid of the Jewish religious leaders. For the Jewish leaders had already agreed that anyone who confessed Jesus to be the Christ would be put out of the synagogue.
JOH 9:23 For this reason his parents said, “He is a mature adult, ask him.”)
JOH 9:24 Then they summoned the man who used to be blind a second time and said to him, “Promise before God to tell the truth. We know that this man is a sinner.”
JOH 9:25 He replied, “I do not know whether he is a sinner. I do know one thing – that although I was blind, now I can see.”
JOH 9:26 Then they said to him, “What did he do to you? How did he cause you to see?”
JOH 9:27 He answered, “I told you already and you didn’t listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You people don’t want to become his disciples too, do you?”
JOH 9:28 They heaped insults on him, saying, “You are his disciple! We are disciples of Moses!
JOH 9:29 We know that God has spoken to Moses! We do not know where this man comes from!”
JOH 9:30 The man replied, “This is a remarkable thing, that you don’t know where he comes from, and yet he caused me to see!
JOH 9:31 We know that God doesn’t listen to sinners, but if anyone is devout and does his will, God listens to him.
JOH 9:32 Never before has anyone heard of someone causing a man born blind to see.
JOH 9:33 If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.”
JOH 9:34 They replied, “You were born completely in sinfulness, and yet you presume to teach us?” So they threw him out.
JOH 9:35 Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, so he found the man and said to him, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
JOH 9:36 The man replied, “And who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?”
JOH 9:37 Jesus told him, “You have seen him; he is the one speaking with you.”
JOH 9:38 [He said, “Lord, I believe,” and he worshiped him.
JOH 9:39 Jesus said,] “For judgment I have come into this world, so that those who do not see may gain their sight, and the ones who see may become blind.”
JOH 9:40 Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard this and asked him, “We are not blind too, are we?”
JOH 9:41 Jesus replied, “If you were blind, you would not be guilty of sin, but now because you claim that you can see, your guilt remains.”
JOH 10:1 “I tell you the solemn truth, the one who does not enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs in some other way, is a thief and a robber.
JOH 10:2 The one who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
JOH 10:3 The doorkeeper opens the door for him, and the sheep hear his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
JOH 10:4 When he has brought all his own sheep out, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they recognize his voice.
JOH 10:5 They will never follow a stranger, but will run away from him, because they do not recognize the stranger’s voice.”
JOH 10:6 Jesus told them this parable, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.
JOH 10:7 So Jesus said to them again, “I tell you the solemn truth, I am the door for the sheep.
JOH 10:8 All who came before me were thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.
JOH 10:9 I am the door. If anyone enters through me, he will be saved, and will come in and go out, and find pasture.
JOH 10:10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I have come so that they may have life, and may have it abundantly.
JOH 10:11 “I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
JOH 10:12 The hired hand, who is not a shepherd and does not own sheep, sees the wolf coming and abandons the sheep and runs away. So the wolf attacks the sheep and scatters them.
JOH 10:13 Because he is a hired hand and is not concerned about the sheep, he runs away.
JOH 10:14 “I am the good shepherd. I know my own and my own know me –
JOH 10:15 just as the Father knows me and I know the Father – and I lay down my life for the sheep.
JOH 10:16 I have other sheep that do not come from this sheepfold. I must bring them too, and they will listen to my voice, so that there will be one flock and one shepherd.
JOH 10:17 This is why the Father loves me – because I lay down my life, so that I may take it back again.
JOH 10:18 No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down of my own free will. I have the authority to lay it down, and I have the authority to take it back again. This commandment I received from my Father.”
JOH 10:19 Another sharp division took place among the Jewish people because of these words.
JOH 10:20 Many of them were saying, “He is possessed by a demon and has lost his mind! Why do you listen to him?”
JOH 10:21 Others said, “These are not the words of someone possessed by a demon. A demon cannot cause the blind to see, can it?”
JOH 10:22 Then came the feast of the Dedication in Jerusalem.
JOH 10:23 It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple area in Solomon’s Portico.
JOH 10:24 The Jewish leaders surrounded him and asked, “How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
JOH 10:25 Jesus replied, “I told you and you do not believe. The deeds I do in my Father’s name testify about me.
JOH 10:26 But you refuse to believe because you are not my sheep.
JOH 10:27 My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
JOH 10:28 I give them eternal life, and they will never perish; no one will snatch them from my hand.
JOH 10:29 My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one can snatch them from my Father’s hand.
JOH 10:30 The Father and I are one.”
JOH 10:31 The Jewish leaders picked up rocks again to stone him to death.
JOH 10:32 Jesus said to them, “I have shown you many good deeds from the Father. For which one of them are you going to stone me?”
JOH 10:33 The Jewish leaders replied, “We are not going to stone you for a good deed but for blasphemy, because you, a man, are claiming to be God.”
JOH 10:34 Jesus answered, “Is it not written in your law, ‘ I said, you are gods’?
JOH 10:35 If those people to whom the word of God came were called ‘gods’ (and the scripture cannot be broken),
JOH 10:36 do you say about the one whom the Father set apart and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’?
JOH 10:37 If I do not perform the deeds of my Father, do not believe me.
JOH 10:38 But if I do them, even if you do not believe me, believe the deeds, so that you may come to know and understand that I am in the Father and the Father is in me.”
JOH 10:39 Then they attempted again to seize him, but he escaped their clutches.
JOH 10:40 Jesus went back across the Jordan River again to the place where John had been baptizing at an earlier time, and he stayed there.
JOH 10:41 Many came to him and began to say, “John performed no miraculous sign, but everything John said about this man was true!”
JOH 10:42 And many believed in Jesus there.
JOH 11:1 Now a certain man named Lazarus was sick. He was from Bethany, the village where Mary and her sister Martha lived.
JOH 11:2 (Now it was Mary who anointed the Lord with perfumed oil and wiped his feet dry with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.)
JOH 11:3 So the sisters sent a message to Jesus, “Lord, look, the one you love is sick.”
JOH 11:4 When Jesus heard this, he said, “This sickness will not lead to death, but to God’s glory, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
JOH 11:5 (Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.)
JOH 11:6 So when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he remained in the place where he was for two more days.
JOH 11:7 Then after this, he said to his disciples, “Let us go to Judea again.”
JOH 11:8 The disciples replied, “Rabbi, the Jewish leaders were just now trying to stone you to death! Are you going there again?”
JOH 11:9 Jesus replied, “Are there not twelve hours in a day? If anyone walks around in the daytime, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
JOH 11:10 But if anyone walks around at night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”
JOH 11:11 After he said this, he added, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep. But I am going there to awaken him.”
JOH 11:12 Then the disciples replied, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.”
JOH 11:13 (Now Jesus had been talking about his death, but they thought he had been talking about real sleep.)
JOH 11:14 Then Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus has died,
JOH 11:15 and I am glad for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
JOH 11:16 So Thomas (called Didymus ) said to his fellow disciples, “Let us go too, so that we may die with him.”
JOH 11:17 When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been in the tomb four days already.
JOH 11:18 (Now Bethany was less than two miles from Jerusalem,
JOH 11:19 so many of the Jewish people of the region had come to Martha and Mary to console them over the loss of their brother.)
JOH 11:20 So when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but Mary was sitting in the house.
JOH 11:21 Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
JOH 11:22 But even now I know that whatever you ask from God, God will grant you.”
JOH 11:23 Jesus replied, “Your brother will come back to life again.”
JOH 11:24 Martha said, “I know that he will come back to life again in the resurrection at the last day.”
JOH 11:25 Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who believes in me will live even if he dies,
JOH 11:26 and the one who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?”
JOH 11:27 She replied, “Yes, Lord, I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God who comes into the world.”
JOH 11:28 And when she had said this, Martha went and called her sister Mary, saying privately, “The Teacher is here and is asking for you.”
JOH 11:29 So when Mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to him.
JOH 11:30 (Now Jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still in the place where Martha had come out to meet him.)
JOH 11:31 Then the people who were with Mary in the house consoling her saw her get up quickly and go out. They followed her, because they thought she was going to the tomb to weep there.
JOH 11:32 Now when Mary came to the place where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said to him, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.”
JOH 11:33 When Jesus saw her weeping, and the people who had come with her weeping, he was intensely moved in spirit and greatly distressed.
JOH 11:34 He asked, “Where have you laid him?” They replied, “Lord, come and see.”
JOH 11:35 Jesus wept.
JOH 11:36 Thus the people who had come to mourn said, “Look how much he loved him!”
JOH 11:37 But some of them said, “This is the man who caused the blind man to see! Couldn’t he have done something to keep Lazarus from dying?”
JOH 11:38 Jesus, intensely moved again, came to the tomb. (Now it was a cave, and a stone was placed across it.)
JOH 11:39 Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, replied, “Lord, by this time the body will have a bad smell, because he has been buried four days.”
JOH 11:40 Jesus responded, “Didn’t I tell you that if you believe, you would see the glory of God?”
JOH 11:41 So they took away the stone. Jesus looked upward and said, “Father, I thank you that you have listened to me.
JOH 11:42 I knew that you always listen to me, but I said this for the sake of the crowd standing around here, that they may believe that you sent me.”
JOH 11:43 When he had said this, he shouted in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!”
JOH 11:44 The one who had died came out, his feet and hands tied up with strips of cloth, and a cloth wrapped around his face. Jesus said to them, “Unwrap him and let him go.”
JOH 11:45 Then many of the people, who had come with Mary and had seen the things Jesus did, believed in him.
JOH 11:46 But some of them went to the Pharisees and reported to them what Jesus had done.
JOH 11:47 So the chief priests and the Pharisees called the council together and said, “What are we doing? For this man is performing many miraculous signs.
JOH 11:48 If we allow him to go on in this way, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away our sanctuary and our nation.”
JOH 11:49 Then one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said, “You know nothing at all!
JOH 11:50 You do not realize that it is more to your advantage to have one man die for the people than for the whole nation to perish.”
JOH 11:51 (Now he did not say this on his own, but because he was high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the Jewish nation,
JOH 11:52 and not for the Jewish nation only, but to gather together into one the children of God who are scattered.)
JOH 11:53 So from that day they planned together to kill him.
JOH 11:54 Thus Jesus no longer went around publicly among the Judeans, but went away from there to the region near the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, and stayed there with his disciples.
JOH 11:55 Now the Jewish feast of Passover was near, and many people went up to Jerusalem from the rural areas before the Passover to cleanse themselves ritually.
JOH 11:56 Thus they were looking for Jesus, and saying to one another as they stood in the temple courts, “What do you think? That he won’t come to the feast?”
JOH 11:57 (Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that anyone who knew where Jesus was should report it, so that they could arrest him.)
JOH 12:1 Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus lived, whom he had raised from the dead.
JOH 12:2 So they prepared a dinner for Jesus there. Martha was serving, and Lazarus was among those present at the table with him.
JOH 12:3 Then Mary took three quarters of a pound of expensive aromatic oil from pure nard and anointed the feet of Jesus. She then wiped his feet dry with her hair. (Now the house was filled with the fragrance of the perfumed oil.)
JOH 12:4 But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples (the one who was going to betray him) said,
JOH 12:5 “Why wasn’t this oil sold for three hundred silver coins and the money given to the poor?”
JOH 12:6 (Now Judas said this not because he was concerned about the poor, but because he was a thief. As keeper of the money box, he used to steal what was put into it.)
JOH 12:7 So Jesus said, “Leave her alone. She has kept it for the day of my burial.
JOH 12:8 For you will always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me!”
JOH 12:9 Now a large crowd of Judeans learned that Jesus was there, and so they came not only because of him but also to see Lazarus whom he had raised from the dead.
JOH 12:10 So the chief priests planned to kill Lazarus too,
JOH 12:11 for on account of him many of the Jewish people from Jerusalem were going away and believing in Jesus.
JOH 12:12 The next day the large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.
JOH 12:13 So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him. They began to shout, “ Hosanna! Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord*! Blessed is the king of Israel!”
JOH 12:14 Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, just as it is written,
JOH 12:15 “ Do not be afraid, people of Zion; look, your king is coming, seated on a donkey’s colt!”
JOH 12:16 (His disciples did not understand these things when they first happened, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him and that these things had happened to him.)
JOH 12:17 So the crowd who had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead were continuing to testify about it.
JOH 12:18 Because they had heard that Jesus had performed this miraculous sign, the crowd went out to meet him.
JOH 12:19 Thus the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you can do nothing. Look, the world has run off after him!”
JOH 12:20 Now some Greeks were among those who had gone up to worship at the feast.
JOH 12:21 So these approached Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and requested, “Sir, we would like to see Jesus.”
JOH 12:22 Philip went and told Andrew, and they both went and told Jesus.
JOH 12:23 Jesus replied, “The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
JOH 12:24 I tell you the solemn truth, unless a kernel of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it produces much grain.
JOH 12:25 The one who loves his life destroys it, and the one who hates his life in this world guards it for eternal life.
JOH 12:26 If anyone wants to serve me, he must follow me, and where I am, my servant will be too. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.
JOH 12:27 “Now my soul is greatly distressed. And what should I say? ‘Father, deliver me from this hour’? No, but for this very reason I have come to this hour.
JOH 12:28 Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.”
JOH 12:29 The crowd that stood there and heard the voice said that it had thundered. Others said that an angel had spoken to him.
JOH 12:30 Jesus said, “This voice has not come for my benefit but for yours.
JOH 12:31 Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of this world will be driven out.
JOH 12:32 And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.”
JOH 12:33 (Now he said this to indicate clearly what kind of death he was going to die.)
JOH 12:34 Then the crowd responded, “We have heard from the law that the Christ will remain forever. How can you say, ‘The Son of Man must be lifted up’? Who is this Son of Man?”
JOH 12:35 Jesus replied, “The light is with you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, so that the darkness may not overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.
JOH 12:36 While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become sons of light.” When Jesus had said these things, he went away and hid himself from them.
JOH 12:37 Although Jesus had performed so many miraculous signs before them, they still refused to believe in him,
JOH 12:38 so that the word of Isaiah the prophet would be fulfilled. He said, “ Lord, who has believed our message, and to whom has the arm of the Lord, who has believed our message, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
JOH 12:39 For this reason they could not believe, because again Isaiah said,
JOH 12:40 “ He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, so that they would not see with their eyes and understand with their heart, and turn to me, and I would heal them*.”
JOH 12:41 Isaiah said these things because he saw Christ’s glory, and spoke about him.
JOH 12:42 Nevertheless, even among the rulers many believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they would not confess Jesus to be the Christ, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue.
JOH 12:43 For they loved praise from men more than praise from God.
JOH 12:44 But Jesus shouted out, “The one who believes in me does not believe in me, but in the one who sent me,
JOH 12:45 and the one who sees me sees the one who sent me.
JOH 12:46 I have come as a light into the world, so that everyone who believes in me should not remain in darkness.
JOH 12:47 If anyone hears my words and does not obey them, I do not judge him. For I have not come to judge the world, but to save the world.
JOH 12:48 The one who rejects me and does not accept my words has a judge; the word I have spoken will judge him at the last day.
JOH 12:49 For I have not spoken from my own authority, but the Father himself who sent me has commanded me what I should say and what I should speak.
JOH 12:50 And I know that his commandment is eternal life. Thus the things I say, I say just as the Father has told me.”
JOH 13:1 Just before the Passover feast, Jesus knew that his time had come to depart from this world to the Father. Having loved his own who were in the world, he now loved them to the very end.
JOH 13:2 The evening meal was in progress, and the devil had already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, that he should betray Jesus.
JOH 13:3 Because Jesus knew that the Father had handed all things over to him, and that he had come from God and was going back to God,
JOH 13:4 he got up from the meal, removed his outer clothes, took a towel and tied it around himself.
JOH 13:5 He poured water into the washbasin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and to dry them with the towel he had wrapped around himself.
JOH 13:6 Then he came to Simon Peter. Peter said to him, “Lord, are you going to wash my feet?”
JOH 13:7 Jesus replied, “You do not understand what I am doing now, but you will understand after these things.”
JOH 13:8 Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet!” Jesus replied, “If I do not wash you, you have no share with me.”
JOH 13:9 Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, wash not only my feet, but also my hands and my head!”
JOH 13:10 Jesus replied, “The one who has bathed needs only to wash his feet, but is completely clean. And you disciples are clean, but not every one of you.”
JOH 13:11 (For Jesus knew the one who was going to betray him. For this reason he said, “Not every one of you is clean.”)
JOH 13:12 So when Jesus had washed their feet and put his outer clothing back on, he took his place at the table again and said to them, “Do you understand what I have done for you?
JOH 13:13 You call me ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and do so correctly, for that is what I am.
JOH 13:14 If I then, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you too ought to wash one another’s feet.
JOH 13:15 For I have given you an example – you should do just as I have done for you.
JOH 13:16 I tell you the solemn truth, the slave is not greater than his master, nor is the one who is sent as a messenger greater than the one who sent him.
JOH 13:17 If you understand these things, you will be blessed if you do them.
JOH 13:18 “What I am saying does not refer to all of you. I know the ones I have chosen. But this is to fulfill the scripture, ‘ The one who eats my bread my bread has turned against me.’
JOH 13:19 I am telling you this now, before it happens, so that when it happens you may believe that I am he.
JOH 13:20 I tell you the solemn truth, whoever accepts the one I send accepts me, and whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me.”
JOH 13:21 When he had said these things, Jesus was greatly distressed in spirit, and testified, “I tell you the solemn truth, one of you will betray me.”
JOH 13:22 The disciples began to look at one another, worried and perplexed to know which of them he was talking about.
JOH 13:23 One of his disciples, the one Jesus loved, was at the table to the right of Jesus in a place of honor.
JOH 13:24 So Simon Peter gestured to this disciple to ask Jesus who it was he was referring to.
JOH 13:25 Then the disciple whom Jesus loved leaned back against Jesus’ chest and asked him, “Lord, who is it?”
JOH 13:26 Jesus replied, “It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread after I have dipped it in the dish.” Then he dipped the piece of bread in the dish and gave it to Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son.
JOH 13:27 And after Judas took the piece of bread, Satan entered into him. Jesus said to him, “What you are about to do, do quickly.”
JOH 13:28 (Now none of those present at the table understood why Jesus said this to Judas.
JOH 13:29 Some thought that, because Judas had the money box, Jesus was telling him to buy whatever they needed for the feast, or to give something to the poor.)
JOH 13:30 Judas took the piece of bread and went out immediately. (Now it was night.)
JOH 13:31 When Judas had gone out, Jesus said, “Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him.
JOH 13:32 If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him right away.
JOH 13:33 Children, I am still with you for a little while. You will look for me, and just as I said to the Jewish religious leaders, ‘Where I am going you cannot come,’ now I tell you the same.
JOH 13:34 “I give you a new commandment – to love one another. Just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another.
JOH 13:35 Everyone will know by this that you are my disciples – if you have love for one another.”
JOH 13:36 Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus replied, “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, but you will follow later.”
JOH 13:37 Peter said to him, “Lord, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you!”
JOH 13:38 Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life for me? I tell you the solemn truth, the rooster will not crow until you have denied me three times!
JOH 14:1 “Do not let your hearts be distressed. You believe in God; believe also in me.
JOH 14:2 There are many dwelling places in my Father’s house. Otherwise, I would have told you, because I am going away to make ready a place for you.
JOH 14:3 And if I go and make ready a place for you, I will come again and take you to be with me, so that where I am you may be too.
JOH 14:4 And you know the way where I am going.”
JOH 14:5 Thomas said, “Lord, we don’t know where you are going. How can we know the way?”
JOH 14:6 Jesus replied, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.
JOH 14:7 If you have known me, you will know my Father too. And from now on you do know him and have seen him.”
JOH 14:8 Philip said, “Lord, show us the Father, and we will be content.”
JOH 14:9 Jesus replied, “Have I been with you for so long, and you have not known me, Philip? The person who has seen me has seen the Father! How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
JOH 14:10 Do you not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you, I do not speak on my own initiative, but the Father residing in me performs his miraculous deeds.
JOH 14:11 Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, but if you do not believe me, believe because of the miraculous deeds themselves.
JOH 14:12 I tell you the solemn truth, the person who believes in me will perform the miraculous deeds that I am doing, and will perform greater deeds than these, because I am going to the Father.
JOH 14:13 And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
JOH 14:14 If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.
JOH 14:15 “If you love me, you will obey my commandments.
JOH 14:16 Then I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Advocate to be with you forever –
JOH 14:17 the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot accept, because it does not see him or know him. But you know him, because he resides with you and will be in you.
JOH 14:18 “I will not abandon you as orphans, I will come to you.
JOH 14:19 In a little while the world will not see me any longer, but you will see me; because I live, you will live too.
JOH 14:20 You will know at that time that I am in my Father and you are in me and I am in you.
JOH 14:21 The person who has my commandments and obeys them is the one who loves me. The one who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will reveal myself to him.”
JOH 14:22 “Lord,” Judas (not Judas Iscariot) said, “what has happened that you are going to reveal yourself to us and not to the world?”
JOH 14:23 Jesus replied, “If anyone loves me, he will obey my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and take up residence with him.
JOH 14:24 The person who does not love me does not obey my words. And the word you hear is not mine, but the Father’s who sent me.
JOH 14:25 “I have spoken these things while staying with you.
JOH 14:26 But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you everything, and will cause you to remember everything I said to you.
JOH 14:27 “Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you; I do not give it to you as the world does. Do not let your hearts be distressed or lacking in courage.
JOH 14:28 You heard me say to you, ‘I am going away and I am coming back to you.’ If you loved me, you would be glad that I am going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I am.
JOH 14:29 I have told you now before it happens, so that when it happens you may believe.
JOH 14:30 I will not speak with you much longer, for the ruler of this world is coming. He has no power over me,
JOH 14:31 but I am doing just what the Father commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Get up, let us go from here.”
JOH 15:1 “I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener.
JOH 15:2 He takes away every branch that does not bear fruit in me. He prunes every branch that bears fruit so that it will bear more fruit.
JOH 15:3 You are clean already because of the word that I have spoken to you.
JOH 15:4 Remain in me, and I will remain in you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you unless you remain in me.
JOH 15:5 “I am the vine; you are the branches. The one who remains in me – and I in him – bears much fruit, because apart from me you can accomplish nothing.
JOH 15:6 If anyone does not remain in me, he is thrown out like a branch, and dries up; and such branches are gathered up and thrown into the fire, and are burned up.
JOH 15:7 If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you want, and it will be done for you.
JOH 15:8 My Father is honored by this, that you bear much fruit and show that you are my disciples.
JOH 15:9 “Just as the Father has loved me, I have also loved you; remain in my love.
JOH 15:10 If you obey my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have obeyed my Father’s commandments and remain in his love.
JOH 15:11 I have told you these things so that my joy may be in you, and your joy may be complete.
JOH 15:12 My commandment is this – to love one another just as I have loved you.
JOH 15:13 No one has greater love than this – that one lays down his life for his friends.
JOH 15:14 You are my friends if you do what I command you.
JOH 15:15 I no longer call you slaves, because the slave does not understand what his master is doing. But I have called you friends, because I have revealed to you everything I heard from my Father.
JOH 15:16 You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit, fruit that remains, so that whatever you ask the Father in my name he will give you.
JOH 15:17 This I command you – to love one another.
JOH 15:18 “If the world hates you, be aware that it hated me first.
JOH 15:19 If you belonged to the world, the world would love you as its own. However, because you do not belong to the world, but I chose you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you.
JOH 15:20 Remember what I told you, ‘A slave is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they obeyed my word, they will obey yours too.
JOH 15:21 But they will do all these things to you on account of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me.
JOH 15:22 If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. But they no longer have any excuse for their sin.
JOH 15:23 The one who hates me hates my Father too.
JOH 15:24 If I had not performed among them the miraculous deeds that no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin. But now they have seen the deeds and have hated both me and my Father.
JOH 15:25 Now this happened to fulfill the word that is written in their law, ‘ They hated me without reason.’
JOH 15:26 When the Advocate comes, whom I will send you from the Father – the Spirit of truth who goes out from the Father – he will testify about me,
JOH 15:27 and you also will testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.
JOH 16:1 “I have told you all these things so that you will not fall away.
JOH 16:2 They will put you out of the synagogue, yet a time is coming when the one who kills you will think he is offering service to God.
JOH 16:3 They will do these things because they have not known the Father or me.
JOH 16:4 But I have told you these things so that when their time comes, you will remember that I told you about them. “I did not tell you these things from the beginning because I was with you.
JOH 16:5 But now I am going to the one who sent me, and not one of you is asking me, ‘Where are you going?’
JOH 16:6 Instead your hearts are filled with sadness because I have said these things to you.
JOH 16:7 But I tell you the truth, it is to your advantage that I am going away. For if I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you, but if I go, I will send him to you.
JOH 16:8 And when he comes, he will prove the world wrong concerning sin and righteousness and judgment –
JOH 16:9 concerning sin, because they do not believe in me;
JOH 16:10 concerning righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will see me no longer;
JOH 16:11 and concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been condemned.
JOH 16:12 “I have many more things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.
JOH 16:13 But when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth. For he will not speak on his own authority, but will speak whatever he hears, and will tell you what is to come.
JOH 16:14 He will glorify me, because he will receive from me what is mine and will tell it to you.
JOH 16:15 Everything that the Father has is mine; that is why I said the Spirit will receive from me what is mine and will tell it to you.
JOH 16:16 In a little while you will see me no longer; again after a little while, you will see me.”
JOH 16:17 Then some of his disciples said to one another, “What is the meaning of what he is saying, ‘In a little while you will not see me; again after a little while, you will see me,’ and, ‘because I am going to the Father’?”
JOH 16:18 So they kept on repeating, “What is the meaning of what he says, ‘In a little while’? We do not understand what he is talking about.”
JOH 16:19 Jesus could see that they wanted to ask him about these things, so he said to them, “Are you asking each other about this – that I said, ‘In a little while you will not see me; again after a little while, you will see me’?
JOH 16:20 I tell you the solemn truth, you will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice; you will be sad, but your sadness will turn into joy.
JOH 16:21 When a woman gives birth, she has distress because her time has come, but when her child is born, she no longer remembers the suffering because of her joy that a human being has been born into the world.
JOH 16:22 So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.
JOH 16:23 At that time you will ask me nothing. I tell you the solemn truth, whatever you ask the Father in my name he will give you.
JOH 16:24 Until now you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive it, so that your joy may be complete.
JOH 16:25 “I have told you these things in obscure figures of speech; a time is coming when I will no longer speak to you in obscure figures, but will tell you plainly about the Father.
JOH 16:26 At that time you will ask in my name, and I do not say that I will ask the Father on your behalf.
JOH 16:27 For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God.
JOH 16:28 I came from the Father and entered into the world, but in turn, I am leaving the world and going back to the Father.”
JOH 16:29 His disciples said, “Look, now you are speaking plainly and not in obscure figures of speech!
JOH 16:30 Now we know that you know everything and do not need anyone to ask you anything. Because of this we believe that you have come from God.”
JOH 16:31 Jesus replied, “Do you now believe?
JOH 16:32 Look, a time is coming – and has come – when you will be scattered, each one to his own home, and I will be left alone. Yet I am not alone, because my Father is with me.
JOH 16:33 I have told you these things so that in me you may have peace. In the world you have trouble and suffering, but take courage – I have conquered the world.”
JOH 17:1 When Jesus had finished saying these things, he looked upward to heaven and said, “Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, so that your Son may glorify you –
JOH 17:2 just as you have given him authority over all humanity, so that he may give eternal life to everyone you have given him.
JOH 17:3 Now this is eternal life – that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you sent.
JOH 17:4 I glorified you on earth by completing the work you gave me to do.
JOH 17:5 And now, Father, glorify me at your side with the glory I had with you before the world was created.
JOH 17:6 “I have revealed your name to the men you gave me out of the world. They belonged to you, and you gave them to me, and they have obeyed your word.
JOH 17:7 Now they understand that everything you have given me comes from you,
JOH 17:8 because I have given them the words you have given me. They accepted them and really understand that I came from you, and they believed that you sent me.
JOH 17:9 I am praying on behalf of them. I am not praying on behalf of the world, but on behalf of those you have given me, because they belong to you.
JOH 17:10 Everything I have belongs to you, and everything you have belongs to me, and I have been glorified by them.
JOH 17:11 I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them safe in your name that you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are one.
JOH 17:12 When I was with them I kept them safe and watched over them in your name that you have given me. Not one of them was lost except the one destined for destruction, so that the scripture could be fulfilled.
JOH 17:13 But now I am coming to you, and I am saying these things in the world, so they may experience my joy completed in themselves.
JOH 17:14 I have given them your word, and the world has hated them, because they do not belong to the world, just as I do not belong to the world.
JOH 17:15 I am not asking you to take them out of the world, but that you keep them safe from the evil one.
JOH 17:16 They do not belong to the world just as I do not belong to the world.
JOH 17:17 Set them apart in the truth; your word is truth.
JOH 17:18 Just as you sent me into the world, so I sent them into the world.
JOH 17:19 And I set myself apart on their behalf, so that they too may be truly set apart.
JOH 17:20 “I am not praying only on their behalf, but also on behalf of those who believe in me through their testimony,
JOH 17:21 that they will all be one, just as you, Father, are in me and I am in you. I pray that they will be in us, so that the world will believe that you sent me.
JOH 17:22 The glory you gave to me I have given to them, that they may be one just as we are one –
JOH 17:23 I in them and you in me – that they may be completely one, so that the world will know that you sent me, and you have loved them just as you have loved me.
JOH 17:24 “Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, so that they can see my glory that you gave me because you loved me before the creation of the world .
JOH 17:25 Righteous Father, even if the world does not know you, I know you, and these men know that you sent me.
JOH 17:26 I made known your name to them, and I will continue to make it known, so that the love you have loved me with may be in them, and I may be in them.”
JOH 18:1 When he had said these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidron Valley. There was an orchard there, and he and his disciples went into it.
JOH 18:2 (Now Judas, the one who betrayed him, knew the place too, because Jesus had met there many times with his disciples.)
JOH 18:3 So Judas obtained a squad of soldiers and some officers of the chief priests and Pharisees. They came to the orchard with lanterns and torches and weapons.
JOH 18:4 Then Jesus, because he knew everything that was going to happen to him, came and asked them, “Who are you looking for?”
JOH 18:5 They replied, “Jesus the Nazarene.” He told them, “I am he.” (Now Judas, the one who betrayed him, was standing there with them.)
JOH 18:6 So when Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they retreated and fell to the ground.
JOH 18:7 Then Jesus asked them again, “Who are you looking for?” And they said, “Jesus the Nazarene.”
JOH 18:8 Jesus replied, “I told you that I am he. If you are looking for me, let these men go.”
JOH 18:9 He said this to fulfill the word he had spoken, “I have not lost a single one of those whom you gave me.”
JOH 18:10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, pulled it out and struck the high priest’s slave, cutting off his right ear. (Now the slave’s name was Malchus.)
JOH 18:11 But Jesus said to Peter, “Put your sword back into its sheath! Am I not to drink the cup that the Father has given me?”
JOH 18:12 Then the squad of soldiers with their commanding officer and the officers of the Jewish leaders arrested Jesus and tied him up.
JOH 18:13 They brought him first to Annas, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
JOH 18:14 (Now it was Caiaphas who had advised the Jewish leaders that it was to their advantage that one man die for the people.)
JOH 18:15 Simon Peter and another disciple followed them as they brought Jesus to Annas. (Now the other disciple was acquainted with the high priest, and he went with Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard.)
JOH 18:16 But Simon Peter was left standing outside by the door. So the other disciple who was acquainted with the high priest came out and spoke to the slave girl who watched the door, and brought Peter inside.
JOH 18:17 The girl who was the doorkeeper said to Peter, “You’re not one of this man’s disciples too, are you?” He replied, “I am not.”
JOH 18:18 (Now the slaves and the guards were standing around a charcoal fire they had made, warming themselves because it was cold. Peter also was standing with them, warming himself.)
JOH 18:19 While this was happening, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
JOH 18:20 Jesus replied, “I have spoken publicly to the world. I always taught in the synagogues and in the temple courts, where all the Jewish people assemble together. I have said nothing in secret.
JOH 18:21 Why do you ask me? Ask those who heard what I said. They know what I said.”
JOH 18:22 When Jesus had said this, one of the high priest’s officers who stood nearby struck him on the face and said, “Is that the way you answer the high priest?”
JOH 18:23 Jesus replied, “If I have said something wrong, confirm what is wrong. But if I spoke correctly, why strike me?”
JOH 18:24 Then Annas sent him, still tied up, to Caiaphas the high priest.
JOH 18:25 Meanwhile Simon Peter was standing in the courtyard warming himself. They said to him, “You aren’t one of his disciples too, are you?” Peter denied it: “I am not!”
JOH 18:26 One of the high priest’s slaves, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Did I not see you in the orchard with him?”
JOH 18:27 Then Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.
JOH 18:28 Then they brought Jesus from Caiaphas to the Roman governor’s residence. (Now it was very early morning.) They did not go into the governor’s residence so they would not be ceremonially defiled, but could eat the Passover meal.
JOH 18:29 So Pilate came outside to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?”
JOH 18:30 They replied, “If this man were not a criminal, we would not have handed him over to you.”
JOH 18:31 Pilate told them, “Take him yourselves and pass judgment on him according to your own law!” The Jewish leaders replied, “We cannot legally put anyone to death.”
JOH 18:32 (This happened to fulfill the word Jesus had spoken when he indicated what kind of death he was going to die. )
JOH 18:33 So Pilate went back into the governor’s residence, summoned Jesus, and asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”
JOH 18:34 Jesus replied, “Are you saying this on your own initiative, or have others told you about me?”
JOH 18:35 Pilate answered, “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own people and your chief priests handed you over to me. What have you done?”
JOH 18:36 Jesus replied, “My kingdom is not from this world. If my kingdom were from this world, my servants would be fighting to keep me from being handed over to the Jewish authorities. But as it is, my kingdom is not from here.”
JOH 18:37 Then Pilate said, “So you are a king!” Jesus replied, “You say that I am a king. For this reason I was born, and for this reason I came into the world – to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.”
JOH 18:38 Pilate asked, “What is truth?” When he had said this he went back outside to the Jewish leaders and announced, “I find no basis for an accusation against him.
JOH 18:39 But it is your custom that I release one prisoner for you at the Passover. So do you want me to release for you the king of the Jews?”
JOH 18:40 Then they shouted back, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” (Now Barabbas was a revolutionary. )
JOH 19:1 Then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged severely.
JOH 19:2 The soldiers braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they clothed him in a purple robe.
JOH 19:3 They came up to him again and again and said, “Hail, king of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly in the face.
JOH 19:4 Again Pilate went out and said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find no reason for an accusation against him.”
JOH 19:5 So Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to them, “Look, here is the man!”
JOH 19:6 When the chief priests and their officers saw him, they shouted out, “Crucify him! Crucify him!” Pilate said, “You take him and crucify him! Certainly I find no reason for an accusation against him!”
JOH 19:7 The Jewish leaders replied, “We have a law, and according to our law he ought to die, because he claimed to be the Son of God!”
JOH 19:8 When Pilate heard what they said, he was more afraid than ever,
JOH 19:9 and he went back into the governor’s residence and said to Jesus, “Where do you come from?” But Jesus gave him no answer.
JOH 19:10 So Pilate said, “Do you refuse to speak to me? Don’t you know I have the authority to release you, and to crucify you?”
JOH 19:11 Jesus replied, “You would have no authority over me at all, unless it was given to you from above. Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of greater sin.”
JOH 19:12 From this point on, Pilate tried to release him. But the Jewish leaders shouted out, “If you release this man, you are no friend of Caesar! Everyone who claims to be a king opposes Caesar!”
JOH 19:13 When Pilate heard these words he brought Jesus outside and sat down on the judgment seat in the place called “The Stone Pavement” ( Gabbatha in Aramaic).
JOH 19:14 (Now it was the day of preparation for the Passover, about noon. ) Pilate said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, here is your king!”
JOH 19:15 Then they shouted out, “Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!” Pilate asked, “Shall I crucify your king?” The high priests replied, “We have no king except Caesar!”
JOH 19:16 Then Pilate handed him over to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus,
JOH 19:17 and carrying his own cross he went out to the place called “The Place of the Skull” (called in Aramaic Golgotha).
JOH 19:18 There they crucified him along with two others, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle.
JOH 19:19 Pilate also had a notice written and fastened to the cross, which read: “Jesus the Nazarene, the king of the Jews.”
JOH 19:20 Thus many of the Jewish residents of Jerusalem read this notice, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and the notice was written in Aramaic, Latin, and Greek.
JOH 19:21 Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The king of the Jews,’ but rather, ‘This man said, I am king of the Jews.’”
JOH 19:22 Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”
JOH 19:23 Now when the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and made four shares, one for each soldier, and the tunic remained. (Now the tunic was seamless, woven from top to bottom as a single piece.)
JOH 19:24 So the soldiers said to one another, “Let’s not tear it, but throw dice to see who will get it.” This took place to fulfill the scripture that says, “ They divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they threw dice.” So the soldiers did these things.
JOH 19:25 Now standing beside Jesus’ cross were his mother, his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
JOH 19:26 So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, “Woman, look, here is your son!”
JOH 19:27 He then said to his disciple, “Look, here is your mother!” From that very time the disciple took her into his own home.
JOH 19:28 After this Jesus, realizing that by this time everything was completed, said (in order to fulfill the scripture), “I am thirsty!”
JOH 19:29 A jar full of sour wine was there, so they put a sponge soaked in sour wine on a branch of hyssop and lifted it to his mouth.
JOH 19:30 When he had received the sour wine, Jesus said, “It is completed!” Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
JOH 19:31 Then, because it was the day of preparation, so that the bodies should not stay on the crosses on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was an especially important one), the Jewish leaders asked Pilate to have the victims’ legs broken and the bodies taken down.
JOH 19:32 So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the two men who had been crucified with Jesus, first the one and then the other.
JOH 19:33 But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
JOH 19:34 But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and blood and water flowed out immediately.
JOH 19:35 And the person who saw it has testified (and his testimony is true, and he knows that he is telling the truth), so that you also may believe.
JOH 19:36 For these things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled, “ Not a bone of his will be broken.”
JOH 19:37 And again another scripture says, “ They will look on the one whom they have pierced.”
JOH 19:38 After this, Joseph of Arimathea, a disciple of Jesus (but secretly, because he feared the Jewish leaders ), asked Pilate if he could remove the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him permission, so he went and took the body away.
JOH 19:39 Nicodemus, the man who had previously come to Jesus at night, accompanied Joseph, carrying a mixture of myrrh and aloes weighing about seventy-five pounds.
JOH 19:40 Then they took Jesus’ body and wrapped it, with the aromatic spices, in strips of linen cloth according to Jewish burial customs.
JOH 19:41 Now at the place where Jesus was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden was a new tomb where no one had yet been buried.
JOH 19:42 And so, because it was the Jewish day of preparation and the tomb was nearby, they placed Jesus’ body there.
JOH 20:1 Now very early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the tomb and saw that the stone had been moved away from the entrance.
JOH 20:2 So she went running to Simon Peter and the other disciple whom Jesus loved and told them, “They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!”
JOH 20:3 Then Peter and the other disciple set out to go to the tomb.
JOH 20:4 The two were running together, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and reached the tomb first.
JOH 20:5 He bent down and saw the strips of linen cloth lying there, but he did not go in.
JOH 20:6 Then Simon Peter, who had been following him, arrived and went right into the tomb. He saw the strips of linen cloth lying there,
JOH 20:7 and the face cloth, which had been around Jesus’ head, not lying with the strips of linen cloth but rolled up in a place by itself.
JOH 20:8 Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, came in, and he saw and believed.
JOH 20:9 (For they did not yet understand the scripture that Jesus must rise from the dead.)
JOH 20:10 So the disciples went back to their homes.
JOH 20:11 But Mary stood outside the tomb weeping. As she wept, she bent down and looked into the tomb.
JOH 20:12 And she saw two angels in white sitting where Jesus’ body had been lying, one at the head and one at the feet.
JOH 20:13 They said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” Mary replied, “They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have put him!”
JOH 20:14 When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was Jesus.
JOH 20:15 Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?” Because she thought he was the gardener, she said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will take him.”
JOH 20:16 Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned and said to him in Aramaic, “ Rabboni” (which means Teacher).
JOH 20:17 Jesus replied, “Do not touch me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. Go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’”
JOH 20:18 Mary Magdalene came and informed the disciples, “I have seen the Lord!” And she told them what Jesus had said to her.
JOH 20:19 On the evening of that day, the first day of the week, the disciples had gathered together and locked the doors of the place because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders. Jesus came and stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
JOH 20:20 When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
JOH 20:21 So Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you. Just as the Father has sent me, I also send you.”
JOH 20:22 And after he said this, he breathed on them and said, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
JOH 20:23 If you forgive anyone’s sins, they are forgiven; if you retain anyone’s sins, they are retained.”
JOH 20:24 Now Thomas (called Didymus), one of the twelve, was not with them when Jesus came.
JOH 20:25 The other disciples told him, “We have seen the Lord!” But he replied, “Unless I see the wounds from the nails in his hands, and put my finger into the wounds from the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will never believe it!”
JOH 20:26 Eight days later the disciples were again together in the house, and Thomas was with them. Although the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you!”
JOH 20:27 Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here, and examine my hands. Extend your hand and put it into my side. Do not continue in your unbelief, but believe.”
JOH 20:28 Thomas replied to him, “My Lord and my God!”
JOH 20:29 Jesus said to him, “Have you believed because you have seen me? Blessed are the people who have not seen and yet have believed.”
JOH 20:30 Now Jesus performed many other miraculous signs in the presence of the disciples, which are not recorded in this book.
JOH 20:31 But these are recorded so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.
JOH 21:1 After this Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias. Now this is how he did so.
JOH 21:2 Simon Peter, Thomas (called Didymus), Nathanael (who was from Cana in Galilee), the sons of Zebedee, and two other disciples of his were together.
JOH 21:3 Simon Peter told them, “I am going fishing.” “We will go with you,” they replied. They went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.
JOH 21:4 When it was already very early morning, Jesus stood on the beach, but the disciples did not know that it was Jesus.
JOH 21:5 So Jesus said to them, “Children, you don’t have any fish, do you?” They replied, “No.”
JOH 21:6 He told them, “Throw your net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.” So they threw the net, and were not able to pull it in because of the large number of fish.
JOH 21:7 Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” So Simon Peter, when he heard that it was the Lord, tucked in his outer garment (for he had nothing on underneath it), and plunged into the sea.
JOH 21:8 Meanwhile the other disciples came with the boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not far from land, only about a hundred yards.
JOH 21:9 When they got out on the beach, they saw a charcoal fire ready with a fish placed on it, and bread.
JOH 21:10 Jesus said, “Bring some of the fish you have just now caught.”
JOH 21:11 So Simon Peter went aboard and pulled the net to shore. It was full of large fish, one hundred fifty-three, but although there were so many, the net was not torn.
JOH 21:12 “Come, have breakfast,” Jesus said. But none of the disciples dared to ask him, “Who are you?” because they knew it was the Lord.
JOH 21:13 Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.
JOH 21:14 This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to the disciples after he was raised from the dead.
JOH 21:15 Then when they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these do?” He replied, “Yes, Lord, you know I love you.” Jesus told him, “Feed my lambs.”
JOH 21:16 Jesus said a second time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” He replied, “Yes, Lord, you know I love you.” Jesus told him, “Shepherd my sheep.”
JOH 21:17 Jesus said a third time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” Peter was distressed that Jesus asked him a third time, “Do you love me?” and said, “Lord, you know everything. You know that I love you.” Jesus replied, “Feed my sheep.
JOH 21:18 I tell you the solemn truth, when you were young, you tied your clothes around you and went wherever you wanted, but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and others will tie you up and bring you where you do not want to go.”
JOH 21:19 (Now Jesus said this to indicate clearly by what kind of death Peter was going to glorify God.) After he said this, Jesus told Peter, “Follow me.”
JOH 21:20 Peter turned around and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them. (This was the disciple who had leaned back against Jesus’ chest at the meal and asked, “Lord, who is the one who is going to betray you?”)
JOH 21:21 So when Peter saw him, he asked Jesus, “Lord, what about him?”
JOH 21:22 Jesus replied, “If I want him to live until I come back, what concern is that of yours? You follow me!”
JOH 21:23 So the saying circulated among the brothers and sisters that this disciple was not going to die. But Jesus did not say to him that he was not going to die, but rather, “If I want him to live until I come back, what concern is that of yours?”
JOH 21:24 This is the disciple who testifies about these things and has written these things, and we know that his testimony is true.
JOH 21:25 There are many other things that Jesus did. If every one of them were written down, I suppose the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.
ACT 1:1 I wrote the former account, Theophilus, about all that Jesus began to do and teach
ACT 1:2 until the day he was taken up to heaven, after he had given orders by the Holy Spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
ACT 1:3 To the same apostles also, after his suffering, he presented himself alive with many convincing proofs. He was seen by them over a forty-day period and spoke about matters concerning the kingdom of God.
ACT 1:4 While he was with them, he declared, “Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait there for what my Father promised, which you heard about from me.
ACT 1:5 For John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days from now.”
ACT 1:6 So when they had gathered together, they began to ask him, “Lord, is this the time when you are restoring the kingdom to Israel?”
ACT 1:7 He told them, “You are not permitted to know the times or periods that the Father has set by his own authority.
ACT 1:8 But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the farthest parts of the earth.”
ACT 1:9 After he had said this, while they were watching, he was lifted up and a cloud hid him from their sight.
ACT 1:10 As they were still staring into the sky while he was going, suddenly two men in white clothing stood near them
ACT 1:11 and said, “Men of Galilee, why do you stand here looking up into the sky? This same Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven will come back in the same way you saw him go into heaven.”
ACT 1:12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called the Mount of Olives (which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day’s journey away).
ACT 1:13 When they had entered Jerusalem, they went to the upstairs room where they were staying. Peter and John, and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James were there.
ACT 1:14 All these continued together in prayer with one mind, together with the women, along with Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
ACT 1:15 In those days Peter stood up among the believers (a gathering of about one hundred and twenty people) and said,
ACT 1:16 “Brothers, the scripture had to be fulfilled that the Holy Spirit foretold through David concerning Judas – who became the guide for those who arrested Jesus –
ACT 1:17 for he was counted as one of us and received a share in this ministry.”
ACT 1:18 (Now this man Judas acquired a field with the reward of his unjust deed, and falling headfirst he burst open in the middle and all his intestines gushed out.
ACT 1:19 This became known to all who lived in Jerusalem, so that in their own language they called that field Hakeldama, that is, “Field of Blood.”)
ACT 1:20 “For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘ Let his house become deserted, and let there be no one to live in it,’ and ‘ Let another take his position of responsibility.’
ACT 1:21 Thus one of the men who have accompanied us during all the time the Lord Jesus associated with us,
ACT 1:22 beginning from his baptism by John until the day he was taken up from us – one of these must become a witness of his resurrection together with us.”
ACT 1:23 So they proposed two candidates: Joseph called Barsabbas (also called Justus) and Matthias.
ACT 1:24 Then they prayed, “Lord, you know the hearts of all. Show us which one of these two you have chosen
ACT 1:25 to assume the task of this service and apostleship from which Judas turned aside to go to his own place.”
ACT 1:26 Then they cast lots for them, and the one chosen was Matthias; so he was counted with the eleven apostles.
ACT 2:1 Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all together in one place.
ACT 2:2 Suddenly a sound like a violent wind blowing came from heaven and filled the entire house where they were sitting.
ACT 2:3 And tongues spreading out like a fire appeared to them and came to rest on each one of them.
ACT 2:4 All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit, and they began to speak in other languages as the Spirit enabled them.
ACT 2:5 Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven residing in Jerusalem.
ACT 2:6 When this sound occurred, a crowd gathered and was in confusion, because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
ACT 2:7 Completely baffled, they said, “Aren’t all these who are speaking Galileans?
ACT 2:8 And how is it that each one of us hears them in our own native language?
ACT 2:9 Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and the province of Asia,
ACT 2:10 Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya near Cyrene, and visitors from Rome,
ACT 2:11 both Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabs – we hear them speaking in our own languages about the great deeds God has done!”
ACT 2:12 All were astounded and greatly confused, saying to one another, “What does this mean?”
ACT 2:13 But others jeered at the speakers, saying, “They are drunk on new wine!”
ACT 2:14 But Peter stood up with the eleven, raised his voice, and addressed them: “You men of Judea and all you who live in Jerusalem, know this and listen carefully to what I say.
ACT 2:15 In spite of what you think, these men are not drunk, for it is only nine o’clock in the morning.
ACT 2:16 But this is what was spoken about through the prophet Joel:
ACT 2:17 ‘ And in the last days it will be,’ God says, ‘ that I will pour out my Spirit on all people, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy, and your young men will see visions, and your old men will dream dreams.
ACT 2:18 Even on my servants, both men and women,* I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
ACT 2:19 And I will perform wonders in the sky above* and miraculous signs on the earth below, blood and fire and clouds of smoke.
ACT 2:20 The sun will be changed to darkness and the moon to blood before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes.
ACT 2:21 And then everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.’
ACT 2:22 “Men of Israel, listen to these words: Jesus the Nazarene, a man clearly attested to you by God with powerful deeds, wonders, and miraculous signs that God performed among you through him, just as you yourselves know –
ACT 2:23 this man, who was handed over by the predetermined plan and foreknowledge of God, you executed by nailing him to a cross at the hands of Gentiles.
ACT 2:24 But God raised him up, having released him from the pains of death, because it was not possible for him to be held in its power.
ACT 2:25 For David says about him, ‘ I saw the Lord always in front of me, for he is at my right hand so that I will not be shaken.
ACT 2:26 Therefore my heart was glad and my tongue rejoiced; my body also will live in hope,
ACT 2:27 because you will not leave my soul in Hades, nor permit your Holy One to experience decay.
ACT 2:28 You have made known to me the paths of life; you will make me full of joy with your presence.’
ACT 2:29 “Brothers, I can speak confidently to you about our forefather David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
ACT 2:30 So then, because he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn to him with an oath to seat one of his descendants on his throne,
ACT 2:31 David by foreseeing this spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that he was neither abandoned to Hades, nor did his body experience decay.
ACT 2:32 This Jesus God raised up, and we are all witnesses of it.
ACT 2:33 So then, exalted to the right hand of God, and having received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he has poured out what you both see and hear.
ACT 2:34 For David did not ascend into heaven, but he himself says, ‘ The Lord said to my lord, “ Sit at my right hand*
ACT 2:35 until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
ACT 2:36 Therefore let all the house of Israel know beyond a doubt that God has made this Jesus whom you crucified both Lord and Christ.”
ACT 2:37 Now when they heard this, they were acutely distressed and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, “What should we do, brothers?”
ACT 2:38 Peter said to them, “Repent, and each one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
ACT 2:39 For the promise is for you and your children, and for all who are far away, as many as the Lord our God will call to himself.”
ACT 2:40 With many other words he testified and exhorted them saying, “Save yourselves from this perverse generation!”
ACT 2:41 So those who accepted his message were baptized, and that day about three thousand people were added.
ACT 2:42 They were devoting themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
ACT 2:43 Reverential awe came over everyone, and many wonders and miraculous signs came about by the apostles.
ACT 2:44 All who believed were together and held everything in common,
ACT 2:45 and they began selling their property and possessions and distributing the proceeds to everyone, as anyone had need.
ACT 2:46 Every day they continued to gather together by common consent in the temple courts, breaking bread from house to house, sharing their food with glad and humble hearts,
ACT 2:47 praising God and having the good will of all the people. And the Lord was adding to their number every day those who were being saved.
ACT 3:1 Now Peter and John were going up to the temple at the time for prayer, at three o’clock in the afternoon.
ACT 3:2 And a man lame from birth was being carried up, who was placed at the temple gate called “the Beautiful Gate” every day so he could beg for money from those going into the temple courts.
ACT 3:3 When he saw Peter and John about to go into the temple courts, he asked them for money.
ACT 3:4 Peter looked directly at him (as did John) and said, “Look at us!”
ACT 3:5 So the lame man paid attention to them, expecting to receive something from them.
ACT 3:6 But Peter said, “I have no silver or gold, but what I do have I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, stand up and walk!”
ACT 3:7 Then Peter took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up, and at once the man’s feet and ankles were made strong.
ACT 3:8 He jumped up, stood and began walking around, and he entered the temple courts with them, walking and leaping and praising God.
ACT 3:9 All the people saw him walking and praising God,
ACT 3:10 and they recognized him as the man who used to sit and ask for donations at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were filled with astonishment and amazement at what had happened to him.
ACT 3:11 While the man was hanging on to Peter and John, all the people, completely astounded, ran together to them in the covered walkway called Solomon’s Portico.
ACT 3:12 When Peter saw this, he declared to the people, “Men of Israel, why are you amazed at this? Why do you stare at us as if we had made this man walk by our own power or piety?
ACT 3:13 The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our forefathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you handed over and rejected in the presence of Pilate after he had decided to release him.
ACT 3:14 But you rejected the Holy and Righteous One and asked that a man who was a murderer be released to you.
ACT 3:15 You killed the Originator of life, whom God raised from the dead. To this fact we are witnesses!
ACT 3:16 And on the basis of faith in Jesus’ name, his very name has made this man – whom you see and know – strong. The faith that is through Jesus has given him this complete health in the presence of you all.
ACT 3:17 And now, brothers, I know you acted in ignorance, as your rulers did too.
ACT 3:18 But the things God foretold long ago through all the prophets – that his Christ would suffer – he has fulfilled in this way.
ACT 3:19 Therefore repent and turn back so that your sins may be wiped out,
ACT 3:20 so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and so that he may send the Messiah appointed for you – that is, Jesus.
ACT 3:21 This one heaven must receive until the time all things are restored, which God declared from times long ago through his holy prophets.
ACT 3:22 Moses said, ‘ The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers. You must obey him in everything he tells you*.
ACT 3:23 Every person who does not obey that prophet will be destroyed and thus removed from the people.’
ACT 3:24 And all the prophets, from Samuel and those who followed him, have spoken about and announced these days.
ACT 3:25 You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your ancestors, saying to Abraham, ‘ And in your descendants all the nations of the earth will be blessed: *.’
ACT 3:26 God raised up his servant and sent him first to you, to bless you by turning each one of you from your iniquities.”
ACT 4:1 While Peter and John were speaking to the people, the priests and the commander of the temple guard and the Sadducees came up to them,
ACT 4:2 angry because they were teaching the people and announcing in Jesus the resurrection of the dead.
ACT 4:3 So they seized them and put them in jail until the next day (for it was already evening).
ACT 4:4 But many of those who had listened to the message believed, and the number of the men came to about five thousand.
ACT 4:5 On the next day, their rulers, elders, and experts in the law came together in Jerusalem.
ACT 4:6 Annas the high priest was there, and Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and others who were members of the high priest’s family.
ACT 4:7 After making Peter and John stand in their midst, they began to inquire, “By what power or by what name did you do this?”
ACT 4:8 Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, replied, “Rulers of the people and elders,
ACT 4:9 if we are being examined today for a good deed done to a sick man – by what means this man was healed –
ACT 4:10 let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel that by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, this man stands before you healthy.
ACT 4:11 This Jesus is the stone that was rejected by that was rejected by you, the builders, that has become the cornerstone.
ACT 4:12 And there is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among people by which we must be saved.”
ACT 4:13 When they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and discovered that they were uneducated and ordinary men, they were amazed and recognized these men had been with Jesus.
ACT 4:14 And because they saw the man who had been healed standing with them, they had nothing to say against this.
ACT 4:15 But when they had ordered them to go outside the council, they began to confer with one another,
ACT 4:16 saying, “What should we do with these men? For it is plain to all who live in Jerusalem that a notable miraculous sign has come about through them, and we cannot deny it.
ACT 4:17 But to keep this matter from spreading any further among the people, let us warn them to speak no more to anyone in this name.”
ACT 4:18 And they called them in and ordered them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus.
ACT 4:19 But Peter and John replied, “Whether it is right before God to obey you rather than God, you decide,
ACT 4:20 for it is impossible for us not to speak about what we have seen and heard.”
ACT 4:21 After threatening them further, they released them, for they could not find how to punish them on account of the people, because they were all praising God for what had happened.
ACT 4:22 For the man, on whom this miraculous sign of healing had been performed, was over forty years old.
ACT 4:23 When they were released, Peter and John went to their fellow believers and reported everything the high priests and the elders had said to them.
ACT 4:24 When they heard this, they raised their voices to God with one mind and said, “Master of all, you who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them,
ACT 4:25 who said by the Holy Spirit through your servant David our forefather, ‘ Why do the nations rage, and the peoples plot foolish things?
ACT 4:26 The kings of the earth stood together, and the rulers assembled together, against the Lord and against his Christ: *.’
ACT 4:27 “For indeed both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, assembled together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed,
ACT 4:28 to do as much as your power and your plan had decided beforehand would happen.
ACT 4:29 And now, Lord, pay attention to their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your message with great courage,
ACT 4:30 while you extend your hand to heal, and to bring about miraculous signs and wonders through the name of your holy servant Jesus.”
ACT 4:31 When they had prayed, the place where they were assembled together was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak the word of God courageously.
ACT 4:32 The group of those who believed were of one heart and mind, and no one said that any of his possessions was his own, but everything was held in common.
ACT 4:33 With great power the apostles were giving testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was on them all.
ACT 4:34 For there was no one needy among them, because those who were owners of land or houses were selling them and bringing the proceeds from the sales
ACT 4:35 and placing them at the apostles’ feet. The proceeds were distributed to each, as anyone had need.
ACT 4:36 So Joseph, a Levite who was a native of Cyprus, called by the apostles Barnabas (which is translated “son of encouragement”),
ACT 4:37 sold a field that belonged to him and brought the money and placed it at the apostles’ feet.
ACT 5:1 Now a man named Ananias, together with Sapphira his wife, sold a piece of property.
ACT 5:2 He kept back for himself part of the proceeds with his wife’s knowledge; he brought only part of it and placed it at the apostles’ feet.
ACT 5:3 But Peter said, “Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and keep back for yourself part of the proceeds from the sale of the land?
ACT 5:4 Before it was sold, did it not belong to you? And when it was sold, was the money not at your disposal? How have you thought up this deed in your heart? You have not lied to people but to God!”
ACT 5:5 When Ananias heard these words he collapsed and died, and great fear gripped all who heard about it.
ACT 5:6 So the young men came, wrapped him up, carried him out, and buried him.
ACT 5:7 After an interval of about three hours, his wife came in, but she did not know what had happened.
ACT 5:8 Peter said to her, “Tell me, were the two of you paid this amount for the land?” Sapphira said, “Yes, that much.”
ACT 5:9 Peter then told her, “Why have you agreed together to test the Spirit of the Lord? Look! The feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out!”
ACT 5:10 At once she collapsed at his feet and died. So when the young men came in, they found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her beside her husband.
ACT 5:11 Great fear gripped the whole church and all who heard about these things.
ACT 5:12 Now many miraculous signs and wonders came about among the people through the hands of the apostles. By common consent they were all meeting together in Solomon’s Portico.
ACT 5:13 None of the rest dared to join them, but the people held them in high honor.
ACT 5:14 More and more believers in the Lord were added to their number, crowds of both men and women.
ACT 5:15 Thus they even carried the sick out into the streets, and put them on cots and pallets, so that when Peter came by at least his shadow would fall on some of them.
ACT 5:16 A crowd of people from the towns around Jerusalem also came together, bringing the sick and those troubled by unclean spirits. They were all being healed.
ACT 5:17 Now the high priest rose up, and all those with him (that is, the religious party of the Sadducees ), and they were filled with jealousy.
ACT 5:18 They laid hands on the apostles and put them in a public jail.
ACT 5:19 But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the prison, led them out, and said,
ACT 5:20 “Go and stand in the temple courts and proclaim to the people all the words of this life.”
ACT 5:21 When they heard this, they entered the temple courts at daybreak and began teaching. Now when the high priest and those who were with him arrived, they summoned the Sanhedrin – that is, the whole high council of the Israelites – and sent to the jail to have the apostles brought before them.
ACT 5:22 But the officers who came for them did not find them in the prison, so they returned and reported,
ACT 5:23 “We found the jail locked securely and the guards standing at the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one inside.”
ACT 5:24 Now when the commander of the temple guard and the chief priests heard this report, they were greatly puzzled concerning it, wondering what this could be.
ACT 5:25 But someone came and reported to them, “Look! The men you put in prison are standing in the temple courts and teaching the people!”
ACT 5:26 Then the commander of the temple guard went with the officers and brought the apostles without the use of force (for they were afraid of being stoned by the people).
ACT 5:27 When they had brought them, they stood them before the council, and the high priest questioned them,
ACT 5:28 saying, “We gave you strict orders not to teach in this name. Look, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you intend to bring this man’s blood on us!”
ACT 5:29 But Peter and the apostles replied, “We must obey God rather than people.
ACT 5:30 The God of our forefathers raised up Jesus, whom you seized and killed by hanging him on a tree.
ACT 5:31 God exalted him to his right hand as Leader and Savior, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.
ACT 5:32 And we are witnesses of these events, and so is the Holy Spirit whom God has given to those who obey him.”
ACT 5:33 Now when they heard this, they became furious and wanted to execute them.
ACT 5:34 But a Pharisee whose name was Gamaliel, a teacher of the law who was respected by all the people, stood up in the council and ordered the men to be put outside for a short time.
ACT 5:35 Then he said to the council, “Men of Israel, pay close attention to what you are about to do to these men.
ACT 5:36 For some time ago Theudas rose up, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men joined him. He was killed, and all who followed him were dispersed and nothing came of it.
ACT 5:37 After him Judas the Galilean arose in the days of the census, and incited people to follow him in revolt. He too was killed, and all who followed him were scattered.
ACT 5:38 So in this case I say to you, stay away from these men and leave them alone, because if this plan or this undertaking originates with people, it will come to nothing,
ACT 5:39 but if it is from God, you will not be able to stop them, or you may even be found fighting against God.” He convinced them,
ACT 5:40 and they summoned the apostles and had them beaten. Then they ordered them not to speak in the name of Jesus and released them.
ACT 5:41 So they left the council rejoicing because they had been considered worthy to suffer dishonor for the sake of the name.
ACT 5:42 And every day both in the temple courts and from house to house, they did not stop teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus was the Christ.
ACT 6:1 Now in those days, when the disciples were growing in number, a complaint arose on the part of the Greek-speaking Jews against the native Hebraic Jews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.
ACT 6:2 So the twelve called the whole group of the disciples together and said, “It is not right for us to neglect the word of God to wait on tables.
ACT 6:3 But carefully select from among you, brothers, seven men who are well-attested, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may put in charge of this necessary task.
ACT 6:4 But we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
ACT 6:5 The proposal pleased the entire group, so they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, with Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas, a Gentile convert to Judaism from Antioch.
ACT 6:6 They stood these men before the apostles, who prayed and placed their hands on them.
ACT 6:7 The word of God continued to spread, the number of disciples in Jerusalem increased greatly, and a large group of priests became obedient to the faith.
ACT 6:8 Now Stephen, full of grace and power, was performing great wonders and miraculous signs among the people.
ACT 6:9 But some men from the Synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called), both Cyrenians and Alexandrians, as well as some from Cilicia and the province of Asia, stood up and argued with Stephen.
ACT 6:10 Yet they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke.
ACT 6:11 Then they secretly instigated some men to say, “We have heard this man speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God.”
ACT 6:12 They incited the people, the elders, and the experts in the law; then they approached Stephen, seized him, and brought him before the council.
ACT 6:13 They brought forward false witnesses who said, “This man does not stop saying things against this holy place and the law.
ACT 6:14 For we have heard him saying that Jesus the Nazarene will destroy this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
ACT 6:15 All who were sitting in the council looked intently at Stephen and saw his face was like the face of an angel.
ACT 7:1 Then the high priest said, “Are these things true?”
ACT 7:2 So he replied, “Brothers and fathers, listen to me. The God of glory appeared to our forefather Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he settled in Haran,
ACT 7:3 and said to him, ‘ Go out from your country and from your relatives, and come to the land I will show you.’
ACT 7:4 Then he went out from the country of the Chaldeans and settled in Haran. After his father died, God made him move to this country where you now live.
ACT 7:5 He did not give any of it to him for an inheritance, not even a foot of ground, yet God promised to give it to him as his possession, and to his descendants after him, even though Abraham as yet had no child.
ACT 7:6 But God spoke as follows: ‘Your descendants will be foreigners in a foreign country, whose citizens will enslave them and mistreat them for four hundred years.
ACT 7:7 But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves,’ said God, ‘ and after these things they will come out of there and worship me in this place.’
ACT 7:8 Then God gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision, and so he became the father of Isaac and circumcised him when he was eight days old, and Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob of the twelve patriarchs.
ACT 7:9 The patriarchs, because they were jealous of Joseph, sold him into Egypt. But God was with him,
ACT 7:10 and rescued him from all his troubles, and granted him favor and wisdom in the presence of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made him ruler over Egypt and over all his household.
ACT 7:11 Then a famine occurred throughout Egypt and Canaan, causing great suffering, and our ancestors could not find food.
ACT 7:12 So when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent our ancestors there the first time.
ACT 7:13 On their second visit Joseph made himself known to his brothers again, and Joseph’s family became known to Pharaoh.
ACT 7:14 So Joseph sent a message and invited his father Jacob and all his relatives to come, seventy-five people in all.
ACT 7:15 So Jacob went down to Egypt and died there, along with our ancestors,
ACT 7:16 and their bones were later moved to Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a certain sum of money from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
ACT 7:17 “But as the time drew near for God to fulfill the promise he had declared to Abraham, the people increased greatly in number in Egypt,
ACT 7:18 until another king who did not know about Joseph ruled over Egypt.
ACT 7:19 This was the one who exploited our people and was cruel to our ancestors, forcing them to abandon their infants so they would die.
ACT 7:20 At that time Moses was born, and he was beautiful to God. For three months he was brought up in his father’s house,
ACT 7:21 and when he had been abandoned, Pharaoh’s daughter adopted him and brought him up as her own son.
ACT 7:22 So Moses was trained in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was powerful in his words and deeds.
ACT 7:23 But when he was about forty years old, it entered his mind to visit his fellow countrymen the Israelites.
ACT 7:24 When he saw one of them being hurt unfairly, Moses came to his defense and avenged the person who was mistreated by striking down the Egyptian.
ACT 7:25 He thought his own people would understand that God was delivering them through him, but they did not understand.
ACT 7:26 The next day Moses saw two men fighting, and tried to make peace between them, saying, ‘Men, you are brothers; why are you hurting one another?’
ACT 7:27 But the man who was unfairly hurting his neighbor pushed Moses aside, saying, ‘ Who made you a ruler and judge over us?
ACT 7:28 You don’t want to kill me the way you killed the Egyptian yesterday, do you?’
ACT 7:29 When the man said this, Moses fled and became a foreigner in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
ACT 7:30 “After forty years had passed, an angel appeared to him in the desert of Mount Sinai, in the flame of a burning bush.
ACT 7:31 When Moses saw it, he was amazed at the sight, and when he approached to investigate, there came the voice of the Lord,
ACT 7:32 ‘ I am the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.’ Moses began to tremble and did not dare to look more closely.
ACT 7:33 But the Lord said to him, ‘ Take the sandals off your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
ACT 7:34 I have certainly seen the suffering of my people who are in Egypt and have heard their groaning, and I have come down to rescue them. Now come, I will send you to Egypt*.’
ACT 7:35 This same Moses they had rejected, saying, ‘ Who made you a ruler and judge?’ God sent as both ruler and deliverer through the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
ACT 7:36 This man led them out, performing wonders and miraculous signs in the land of Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years.
ACT 7:37 This is the Moses who said to the Israelites, ‘ God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers.’
ACT 7:38 This is the man who was in the congregation in the wilderness with the angel who spoke to him at Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors, and he received living oracles to give to you.
ACT 7:39 Our ancestors were unwilling to obey him, but pushed him aside and turned back to Egypt in their hearts,
ACT 7:40 saying to Aaron, ‘ Make us gods who will go in front of us, for this Moses, who led us out of the land of Egypt – we do not know what has happened to him!’
ACT 7:41 At that time they made an idol in the form of a calf, brought a sacrifice to the idol, and began rejoicing in the works of their hands.
ACT 7:42 But God turned away from them and gave them over to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets: ‘ It was not to me that you offered slain animals and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, was it, house of Israel?
ACT 7:43 But you took along the tabernacle of Moloch and the star of the god Rephan, the images you made to worship, but I will deport you beyond Babylon*.’
ACT 7:44 Our ancestors had the tabernacle of testimony in the wilderness, just as God who spoke to Moses ordered him to make it according to the design he had seen.
ACT 7:45 Our ancestors received possession of it and brought it in with Joshua when they dispossessed the nations that God drove out before our ancestors, until the time of David.
ACT 7:46 He found favor with God and asked that he could find a dwelling place for the house of Jacob.
ACT 7:47 But Solomon built a house for him.
ACT 7:48 Yet the Most High does not live in houses made by human hands, as the prophet says,
ACT 7:49 ‘ Heaven is my throne, and earth is the footstool for my feet. What kind of house will you build for me, says the Lord, or what is my resting place?
ACT 7:50 Did my hand not make all these things?’
ACT 7:51 “You stubborn people, with uncircumcised hearts and ears! You are always resisting the Holy Spirit, like your ancestors did!
ACT 7:52 Which of the prophets did your ancestors not persecute? They killed those who foretold long ago the coming of the Righteous One, whose betrayers and murderers you have now become!
ACT 7:53 You received the law by decrees given by angels, but you did not obey it.”
ACT 7:54 When they heard these things, they became furious and ground their teeth at him.
ACT 7:55 But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked intently toward heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
ACT 7:56 “Look!” he said. “I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!”
ACT 7:57 But they covered their ears, shouting out with a loud voice, and rushed at him with one intent.
ACT 7:58 When they had driven him out of the city, they began to stone him, and the witnesses laid their cloaks at the feet of a young man named Saul.
ACT 7:59 They continued to stone Stephen while he prayed, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!”
ACT 7:60 Then he fell to his knees and cried out with a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them!” When he had said this, he died.
ACT 8:1 And Saul agreed completely with killing him. Now on that day a great persecution began against the church in Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were forced to scatter throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria.
ACT 8:2 Some devout men buried Stephen and made loud lamentation over him.
ACT 8:3 But Saul was trying to destroy the church; entering one house after another, he dragged off both men and women and put them in prison.
ACT 8:4 Now those who had been forced to scatter went around proclaiming the good news of the word.
ACT 8:5 Philip went down to the main city of Samaria and began proclaiming the Christ to them.
ACT 8:6 The crowds were paying attention with one mind to what Philip said, as they heard and saw the miraculous signs he was performing.
ACT 8:7 For unclean spirits, crying with loud shrieks, were coming out of many who were possessed, and many paralyzed and lame people were healed.
ACT 8:8 So there was great joy in that city.
ACT 8:9 Now in that city was a man named Simon, who had been practicing magic and amazing the people of Samaria, claiming to be someone great.
ACT 8:10 All the people, from the least to the greatest, paid close attention to him, saying, “This man is the power of God that is called ‘Great.’”
ACT 8:11 And they paid close attention to him because he had amazed them for a long time with his magic.
ACT 8:12 But when they believed Philip as he was proclaiming the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they began to be baptized, both men and women.
ACT 8:13 Even Simon himself believed, and after he was baptized, he stayed close to Philip constantly, and when he saw the signs and great miracles that were occurring, he was amazed.
ACT 8:14 Now when the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them.
ACT 8:15 These two went down and prayed for them so that they would receive the Holy Spirit.
ACT 8:16 (For the Spirit had not yet come upon any of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.)
ACT 8:17 Then Peter and John placed their hands on the Samaritans, and they received the Holy Spirit.
ACT 8:18 Now Simon, when he saw that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, offered them money,
ACT 8:19 saying, “Give me this power too, so that everyone I place my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit.”
ACT 8:20 But Peter said to him, “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could acquire God’s gift with money!
ACT 8:21 You have no share or part in this matter because your heart is not right before God!
ACT 8:22 Therefore repent of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord that he may perhaps forgive you for the intent of your heart.
ACT 8:23 For I see that you are bitterly envious and in bondage to sin.”
ACT 8:24 But Simon replied, “You pray to the Lord for me so that nothing of what you have said may happen to me.”
ACT 8:25 So after Peter and John had solemnly testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they started back to Jerusalem, proclaiming the good news to many Samaritan villages as they went.
ACT 8:26 Then an angel of the Lord said to Philip, “Get up and go south on the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.” (This is a desert road.)
ACT 8:27 So he got up and went. There he met an Ethiopian eunuch, a court official of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was in charge of all her treasury. He had come to Jerusalem to worship,
ACT 8:28 and was returning home, sitting in his chariot, reading the prophet Isaiah.
ACT 8:29 Then the Spirit said to Philip, “Go over and join this chariot.”
ACT 8:30 So Philip ran up to it and heard the man reading Isaiah the prophet. He asked him, “Do you understand what you’re reading?”
ACT 8:31 The man replied, “How in the world can I, unless someone guides me?” So he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.
ACT 8:32 Now the passage of scripture the man was reading was this: “ He was led like a sheep to slaughter, and like a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth.
ACT 8:33 In humiliation justice was taken from him.* Who can describe his posterity? For his life was taken away from the earth.”
ACT 8:34 Then the eunuch said to Philip, “Please tell me, who is the prophet saying this about – himself or someone else?”
ACT 8:35 So Philip started speaking, and beginning with this scripture proclaimed the good news about Jesus to him.
ACT 8:36 Now as they were going along the road, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, “Look, there is water! What is to stop me from being baptized?”
ACT 8:37 
ACT 8:38 So he ordered the chariot to stop, and both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and Philip baptized him.
ACT 8:39 Now when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord snatched Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him any more, but went on his way rejoicing.
ACT 8:40 Philip, however, found himself at Azotus, and as he passed through the area, he proclaimed the good news to all the towns until he came to Caesarea.
ACT 9:1 Meanwhile Saul, still breathing out threats to murder the Lord’s disciples, went to the high priest
ACT 9:2 and requested letters from him to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any who belonged to the Way, either men or women, he could bring them as prisoners to Jerusalem.
ACT 9:3 As he was going along, approaching Damascus, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.
ACT 9:4 He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”
ACT 9:5 So he said, “Who are you, Lord?” He replied, “I am Jesus whom you are persecuting!
ACT 9:6 But stand up and enter the city and you will be told what you must do.”
ACT 9:7 (Now the men who were traveling with him stood there speechless, because they heard the voice but saw no one.)
ACT 9:8 So Saul got up from the ground, but although his eyes were open, he could see nothing. Leading him by the hand, his companions brought him into Damascus.
ACT 9:9 For three days he could not see, and he neither ate nor drank anything.
ACT 9:10 Now there was a disciple in Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias,” and he replied, “Here I am, Lord.”
ACT 9:11 Then the Lord told him, “Get up and go to the street called ‘Straight,’ and at Judas’ house look for a man from Tarsus named Saul. For he is praying,
ACT 9:12 and he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias come in and place his hands on him so that he may see again.”
ACT 9:13 But Ananias replied, “Lord, I have heard from many people about this man, how much harm he has done to your saints in Jerusalem,
ACT 9:14 and here he has authority from the chief priests to imprison all who call on your name!”
ACT 9:15 But the Lord said to him, “Go, because this man is my chosen instrument to carry my name before Gentiles and kings and the people of Israel.
ACT 9:16 For I will show him how much he must suffer for the sake of my name.”
ACT 9:17 So Ananias departed and entered the house, placed his hands on Saul and said, “Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road as you came here, has sent me so that you may see again and be filled with the Holy Spirit.”
ACT 9:18 Immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he could see again. He got up and was baptized,
ACT 9:19 and after taking some food, his strength returned. For several days he was with the disciples in Damascus,
ACT 9:20 and immediately he began to proclaim Jesus in the synagogues, saying, “This man is the Son of God.”
ACT 9:21 All who heard him were amazed and were saying, “Is this not the man who in Jerusalem was ravaging those who call on this name, and who had come here to bring them as prisoners to the chief priests?”
ACT 9:22 But Saul became more and more capable, and was causing consternation among the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus is the Christ.
ACT 9:23 Now after some days had passed, the Jews plotted together to kill him,
ACT 9:24 but Saul learned of their plot against him. They were also watching the city gates day and night so that they could kill him.
ACT 9:25 But his disciples took him at night and let him down through an opening in the wall by lowering him in a basket.
ACT 9:26 When he arrived in Jerusalem, he attempted to associate with the disciples, and they were all afraid of him, because they did not believe that he was a disciple.
ACT 9:27 But Barnabas took Saul, brought him to the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord on the road, that the Lord had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken out boldly in the name of Jesus.
ACT 9:28 So he was staying with them, associating openly with them in Jerusalem, speaking out boldly in the name of the Lord.
ACT 9:29 He was speaking and debating with the Greek-speaking Jews, but they were trying to kill him.
ACT 9:30 When the brothers found out about this, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus.
ACT 9:31 Then the church throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria experienced peace and thus was strengthened. Living in the fear of the Lord and in the encouragement of the Holy Spirit, the church increased in numbers.
ACT 9:32 Now as Peter was traveling around from place to place, he also came down to the saints who lived in Lydda.
ACT 9:33 He found there a man named Aeneas who had been confined to a mattress for eight years because he was paralyzed.
ACT 9:34 Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus the Christ heals you. Get up and make your own bed!” And immediately he got up.
ACT 9:35 All those who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.
ACT 9:36 Now in Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha (which in translation means Dorcas). She was continually doing good deeds and acts of charity.
ACT 9:37 At that time she became sick and died. When they had washed her body, they placed it in an upstairs room.
ACT 9:38 Because Lydda was near Joppa, when the disciples heard that Peter was there, they sent two men to him and urged him, “Come to us without delay.”
ACT 9:39 So Peter got up and went with them, and when he arrived they brought him to the upper room. All the widows stood beside him, crying and showing him the tunics and other clothing Dorcas used to make while she was with them.
ACT 9:40 But Peter sent them all outside, knelt down, and prayed. Turning to the body, he said, “Tabitha, get up.” Then she opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up.
ACT 9:41 He gave her his hand and helped her get up. Then he called the saints and widows and presented her alive.
ACT 9:42 This became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.
ACT 9:43 So Peter stayed many days in Joppa with a man named Simon, a tanner.
ACT 10:1 Now there was a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, a centurion of what was known as the Italian Cohort.
ACT 10:2 He was a devout, God-fearing man, as was all his household; he did many acts of charity for the people and prayed to God regularly.
ACT 10:3 About three o’clock one afternoon he saw clearly in a vision an angel of God who came in and said to him, “Cornelius.”
ACT 10:4 Staring at him and becoming greatly afraid, Cornelius replied, “What is it, Lord?” The angel said to him, “Your prayers and your acts of charity have gone up as a memorial before God.
ACT 10:5 Now send men to Joppa and summon a man named Simon, who is called Peter.
ACT 10:6 This man is staying as a guest with a man named Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the sea.”
ACT 10:7 When the angel who had spoken to him departed, Cornelius called two of his personal servants and a devout soldier from among those who served him,
ACT 10:8 and when he had explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.
ACT 10:9 About noon the next day, while they were on their way and approaching the city, Peter went up on the roof to pray.
ACT 10:10 He became hungry and wanted to eat, but while they were preparing the meal, a trance came over him.
ACT 10:11 He saw heaven opened and an object something like a large sheet descending, being let down to earth by its four corners.
ACT 10:12 In it were all kinds of four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth and wild birds.
ACT 10:13 Then a voice said to him, “Get up, Peter; slaughter and eat!”
ACT 10:14 But Peter said, “Certainly not, Lord, for I have never eaten anything defiled and ritually unclean!”
ACT 10:15 The voice spoke to him again, a second time, “What God has made clean, you must not consider ritually unclean!”
ACT 10:16 This happened three times, and immediately the object was taken up into heaven.
ACT 10:17 Now while Peter was puzzling over what the vision he had seen could signify, the men sent by Cornelius had learned where Simon’s house was and approached the gate.
ACT 10:18 They called out to ask if Simon, known as Peter, was staying there as a guest.
ACT 10:19 While Peter was still thinking seriously about the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Look! Three men are looking for you.
ACT 10:20 But get up, go down, and accompany them without hesitation, because I have sent them.”
ACT 10:21 So Peter went down to the men and said, “Here I am, the person you’re looking for. Why have you come?”
ACT 10:22 They said, “Cornelius the centurion, a righteous and God-fearing man, well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, was directed by a holy angel to summon you to his house and to hear a message from you.”
ACT 10:23 So Peter invited them in and entertained them as guests. On the next day he got up and set out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him.
ACT 10:24 The following day he entered Caesarea. Now Cornelius was waiting anxiously for them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
ACT 10:25 So when Peter came in, Cornelius met him, fell at his feet, and worshiped him.
ACT 10:26 But Peter helped him up, saying, “Stand up. I too am a mere mortal.”
ACT 10:27 Peter continued talking with him as he went in, and he found many people gathered together.
ACT 10:28 He said to them, “You know that it is unlawful for a Jew to associate with or visit a Gentile, yet God has shown me that I should call no person defiled or ritually unclean.
ACT 10:29 Therefore when you sent for me, I came without any objection. Now may I ask why you sent for me?”
ACT 10:30 Cornelius replied, “Four days ago at this very hour, at three o’clock in the afternoon, I was praying in my house, and suddenly a man in shining clothing stood before me
ACT 10:31 and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard and your acts of charity have been remembered before God.
ACT 10:32 Therefore send to Joppa and summon Simon, who is called Peter. This man is staying as a guest in the house of Simon the tanner, by the sea.’
ACT 10:33 Therefore I sent for you at once, and you were kind enough to come. So now we are all here in the presence of God to listen to everything the Lord has commanded you to say to us.”
ACT 10:34 Then Peter started speaking: “I now truly understand that God does not show favoritism in dealing with people,
ACT 10:35 but in every nation the person who fears him and does what is right is welcomed before him.
ACT 10:36 You know the message he sent to the people of Israel, proclaiming the good news of peace through Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all) –
ACT 10:37 you know what happened throughout Judea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism that John announced:
ACT 10:38 with respect to Jesus from Nazareth, that God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power. He went around doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with him.
ACT 10:39 We are witnesses of all the things he did both in Judea and in Jerusalem. They killed him by hanging him on a tree,
ACT 10:40 but God raised him up on the third day and caused him to be seen,
ACT 10:41 not by all the people, but by us, the witnesses God had already chosen, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
ACT 10:42 He commanded us to preach to the people and to warn them that he is the one appointed by God as judge of the living and the dead.
ACT 10:43 About him all the prophets testify, that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
ACT 10:44 While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the message.
ACT 10:45 The circumcised believers who had accompanied Peter were greatly astonished that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles,
ACT 10:46 for they heard them speaking in tongues and praising God. Then Peter said,
ACT 10:47 “No one can withhold the water for these people to be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit just as we did, can he?”
ACT 10:48 So he gave orders to have them baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay for several days.
ACT 11:1 Now the apostles and the brothers who were throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles too had accepted the word of God.
ACT 11:2 So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers took issue with him,
ACT 11:3 saying, “You went to uncircumcised men and shared a meal with them.”
ACT 11:4 But Peter began and explained it to them point by point, saying,
ACT 11:5 “I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, an object something like a large sheet descending, being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came to me.
ACT 11:6 As I stared I looked into it and saw four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and wild birds.
ACT 11:7 I also heard a voice saying to me, ‘Get up, Peter; slaughter and eat!’
ACT 11:8 But I said, ‘Certainly not, Lord, for nothing defiled or ritually unclean has ever entered my mouth!’
ACT 11:9 But the voice replied a second time from heaven, ‘What God has made clean, you must not consider ritually unclean!’
ACT 11:10 This happened three times, and then everything was pulled up to heaven again.
ACT 11:11 At that very moment, three men sent to me from Caesarea approached the house where we were staying.
ACT 11:12 The Spirit told me to accompany them without hesitation. These six brothers also went with me, and we entered the man’s house.
ACT 11:13 He informed us how he had seen an angel standing in his house and saying, ‘Send to Joppa and summon Simon, who is called Peter,
ACT 11:14 who will speak a message to you by which you and your entire household will be saved.’
ACT 11:15 Then as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them just as he did on us at the beginning.
ACT 11:16 And I remembered the word of the Lord, as he used to say, ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
ACT 11:17 Therefore if God gave them the same gift as he also gave us after believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to hinder God?”
ACT 11:18 When they heard this, they ceased their objections and praised God, saying, “So then, God has granted the repentance that leads to life even to the Gentiles.”
ACT 11:19 Now those who had been scattered because of the persecution that took place over Stephen went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the message to no one but Jews.
ACT 11:20 But there were some men from Cyprus and Cyrene among them who came to Antioch and began to speak to the Greeks too, proclaiming the good news of the Lord Jesus.
ACT 11:21 The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number who believed turned to the Lord.
ACT 11:22 A report about them came to the attention of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
ACT 11:23 When he came and saw the grace of God, he rejoiced and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with devoted hearts,
ACT 11:24 because he was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and of faith, and a significant number of people were brought to the Lord.
ACT 11:25 Then Barnabas departed for Tarsus to look for Saul,
ACT 11:26 and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year Barnabas and Saul met with the church and taught a significant number of people. Now it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called Christians.
ACT 11:27 At that time some prophets came down from Jerusalem
ACT 11:28 One of them, named Agabus, got up and predicted by the Spirit that a severe famine was about to come over the whole inhabited world. (This took place during the reign of Claudius.)
ACT 11:29 So the disciples, each in accordance with his financial ability, decided to send relief to the brothers living in Judea.
ACT 11:30 They did so, sending their financial aid to the elders by Barnabas and Saul.
ACT 12:1 About that time King Herod laid hands on some from the church to harm them.
ACT 12:2 He had James, the brother of John, executed with a sword.
ACT 12:3 When he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter too. (This took place during the feast of Unleavened Bread.)
ACT 12:4 When he had seized him, he put him in prison, handing him over to four squads of soldiers to guard him. Herod planned to bring him out for public trial after the Passover.
ACT 12:5 So Peter was kept in prison, but those in the church were earnestly praying to God for him.
ACT 12:6 On that very night before Herod was going to bring him out for trial, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, while guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison.
ACT 12:7 Suddenly an angel of the Lord appeared, and a light shone in the prison cell. He struck Peter on the side and woke him up, saying, “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off Peter’s wrists.
ACT 12:8 The angel said to him, “Fasten your belt and put on your sandals.” Peter did so. Then the angel said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.”
ACT 12:9 Peter went out and followed him; he did not realize that what was happening through the angel was real, but thought he was seeing a vision.
ACT 12:10 After they had passed the first and second guards, they came to the iron gate leading into the city. It opened for them by itself, and they went outside and walked down one narrow street, when at once the angel left him.
ACT 12:11 When Peter came to himself, he said, “Now I know for certain that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from everything the Jewish people were expecting to happen.”
ACT 12:12 When Peter realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John Mark, where many people had gathered together and were praying.
ACT 12:13 When he knocked at the door of the outer gate, a slave girl named Rhoda answered.
ACT 12:14 When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed she did not open the gate, but ran back in and told them that Peter was standing at the gate.
ACT 12:15 But they said to her, “You’ve lost your mind!” But she kept insisting that it was Peter, and they kept saying, “It is his angel!”
ACT 12:16 Now Peter continued knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were greatly astonished.
ACT 12:17 He motioned to them with his hand to be quiet and then related how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He said, “Tell James and the brothers these things,” and then he left and went to another place.
ACT 12:18 At daybreak there was great consternation among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.
ACT 12:19 When Herod had searched for him and did not find him, he questioned the guards and commanded that they be led away to execution. Then Herod went down from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there.
ACT 12:20 Now Herod was having an angry quarrel with the people of Tyre So they joined together and presented themselves before him. And after convincing Blastus, the king’s personal assistant, to help them, they asked for peace, because their country’s food supply was provided by the king’s country.
ACT 12:21 On a day determined in advance, Herod put on his royal robes, sat down on the judgment seat, and made a speech to them.
ACT 12:22 But the crowd began to shout, “The voice of a god, and not of a man!”
ACT 12:23 Immediately an angel of the Lord struck Herod down because he did not give the glory to God, and he was eaten by worms and died.
ACT 12:24 But the word of God kept on increasing and multiplying.
ACT 12:25 So Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem when they had completed their mission, bringing along with them John Mark.
ACT 13:1 Now there were these prophets and teachers in the church at Antioch: Barnabas, Simeon called Niger, Lucius the Cyrenian, Manaen (a close friend of Herod the tetrarch from childhood ) and Saul.
ACT 13:2 While they were serving the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
ACT 13:3 Then, after they had fasted and prayed and placed their hands on them, they sent them off.
ACT 13:4 So Barnabas and Saul, sent out by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed to Cyprus.
ACT 13:5 When they arrived in Salamis, they began to proclaim the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. (Now they also had John as their assistant.)
ACT 13:6 When they had crossed over the whole island as far as Paphos, they found a magician, a Jewish false prophet named Bar-Jesus,
ACT 13:7 who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. The proconsul summoned Barnabas and Saul and wanted to hear the word of God.
ACT 13:8 But the magician Elymas (for that is the way his name is translated) opposed them, trying to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
ACT 13:9 But Saul (also known as Paul), filled with the Holy Spirit, stared straight at him
ACT 13:10 and said, “You who are full of all deceit and all wrongdoing, you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness – will you not stop making crooked the straight paths of the Lord?
ACT 13:11 Now look, the hand of the Lord is against you, and you will be blind, unable to see the sun for a time!” Immediately mistiness and darkness came over him, and he went around seeking people to lead him by the hand.
ACT 13:12 Then when the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, because he was greatly astounded at the teaching about the Lord.
ACT 13:13 Then Paul and his companions put out to sea from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia, but John left them and returned to Jerusalem.
ACT 13:14 Moving on from Perga, they arrived at Pisidian Antioch, and on the Sabbath day they went into the synagogue and sat down.
ACT 13:15 After the reading from the law and the prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent them a message, saying, “Brothers, if you have any message of exhortation for the people, speak it.”
ACT 13:16 So Paul stood up, gestured with his hand and said, “Men of Israel, and you Gentiles who fear God, listen:
ACT 13:17 The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors and made the people great during their stay as foreigners in the country of Egypt, and with uplifted arm he led them out of it.
ACT 13:18 For a period of about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness.
ACT 13:19 After he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave his people their land as an inheritance.
ACT 13:20 All this took about four hundred fifty years. After this he gave them judges until the time of Samuel the prophet.
ACT 13:21 Then they asked for a king, and God gave them Saul son of Kish, a man from the tribe of Benjamin, who ruled forty years.
ACT 13:22 After removing him, God raised up David their king. He testified about him: ‘ I have found David the son of Jesse to be a man after my heart, who will accomplish everything I want him to do.’
ACT 13:23 From the descendants of this man God brought to Israel a Savior, Jesus, just as he promised.
ACT 13:24 Before Jesus arrived, John had proclaimed a baptism for repentance to all the people of Israel.
ACT 13:25 But while John was completing his mission, he said repeatedly, ‘What do you think I am? I am not he. But look, one is coming after me. I am not worthy to untie the sandals on his feet!’
ACT 13:26 Brothers, descendants of Abraham’s family, and those Gentiles among you who fear God, the message of this salvation has been sent to us.
ACT 13:27 For the people who live in Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize him, and they fulfilled the sayings of the prophets that are read every Sabbath by condemning him.
ACT 13:28 Though they found no basis for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him executed.
ACT 13:29 When they had accomplished everything that was written about him, they took him down from the cross and placed him in a tomb.
ACT 13:30 But God raised him from the dead,
ACT 13:31 and for many days he appeared to those who had accompanied him from Galilee to Jerusalem. These are now his witnesses to the people.
ACT 13:32 And we proclaim to you the good news about the promise to our ancestors,
ACT 13:33 that this promise God has fulfilled to us, their children, by raising Jesus, as also it is written in the second psalm, ‘ You are my Son; today I have fathered you*.’
ACT 13:34 But regarding the fact that he has raised Jesus from the dead, never again to be in a state of decay, God has spoken in this way: ‘ I will give you the holy and trustworthy promises made to David*.’
ACT 13:35 Therefore he also says in another psalm, ‘ You will not permit your Holy One to experience decay*.’
ACT 13:36 For David, after he had served God’s purpose in his own generation, died, was buried with his ancestors, and experienced decay,
ACT 13:37 but the one whom God raised up did not experience decay.
ACT 13:38 Therefore let it be known to you, brothers, that through this one forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you,
ACT 13:39 and by this one everyone who believes is justified from everything from which the law of Moses could not justify you.
ACT 13:40 Watch out, then, that what is spoken about by the prophets does not happen to you:
ACT 13:41 ‘ Look, you scoffers; be amazed and perish! For I am doing a work in your days, a work you would never believe, even if someone tells you.’”
ACT 13:42 As Paul and Barnabas were going out, the people were urging them to speak about these things on the next Sabbath.
ACT 13:43 When the meeting of the synagogue had broken up, many of the Jews and God-fearing proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who were speaking with them and were persuading them to continue in the grace of God.
ACT 13:44 On the next Sabbath almost the whole city assembled together to hear the word of the Lord.
ACT 13:45 But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy, and they began to contradict what Paul was saying by reviling him.
ACT 13:46 Both Paul and Barnabas replied courageously, “It was necessary to speak the word of God to you first. Since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we are turning to the Gentiles.
ACT 13:47 For this is what the Lord has commanded us: ‘ I have appointed you to be a light for the Gentiles, to bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
ACT 13:48 When the Gentiles heard this, they began to rejoice and praise the word of the Lord, and all who had been appointed for eternal life believed.
ACT 13:49 So the word of the Lord was spreading through the entire region.
ACT 13:50 But the Jews incited the God-fearing women of high social standing and the prominent men of the city, stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their region.
ACT 13:51 So after they shook the dust off their feet in protest against them, they went to Iconium.
ACT 13:52 And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
ACT 14:1 The same thing happened in Iconium when Paul and Barnabas went into the Jewish synagogue and spoke in such a way that a large group of both Jews and Greeks believed.
ACT 14:2 But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the Gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers.
ACT 14:3 So they stayed there for a considerable time, speaking out courageously for the Lord, who testified to the message of his grace, granting miraculous signs and wonders to be performed through their hands.
ACT 14:4 But the population of the city was divided; some sided with the Jews, and some with the apostles.
ACT 14:5 When both the Gentiles and the Jews (together with their rulers) made an attempt to mistreat them and stone them,
ACT 14:6 Paul and Barnabas learned about it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and the surrounding region.
ACT 14:7 There they continued to proclaim the good news.
ACT 14:8 In Lystra sat a man who could not use his feet, lame from birth, who had never walked.
ACT 14:9 This man was listening to Paul as he was speaking. When Paul stared intently at him and saw he had faith to be healed,
ACT 14:10 he said with a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet.” And the man leaped up and began walking.
ACT 14:11 So when the crowds saw what Paul had done, they shouted in the Lycaonian language, “The gods have come down to us in human form!”
ACT 14:12 They began to call Barnabas Zeus and Paul Hermes, because he was the chief speaker.
ACT 14:13 The priest of the temple of Zeus, located just outside the city, brought bulls and garlands to the city gates; he and the crowds wanted to offer sacrifices to them.
ACT 14:14 But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard about it, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting,
ACT 14:15 “Men, why are you doing these things? We too are men, with human natures just like you! We are proclaiming the good news to you, so that you should turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them.
ACT 14:16 In past generations he allowed all the nations to go their own ways,
ACT 14:17 yet he did not leave himself without a witness by doing good, by giving you rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and your hearts with joy.”
ACT 14:18 Even by saying these things, they scarcely persuaded the crowds not to offer sacrifice to them.
ACT 14:19 But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and after winning the crowds over, they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, presuming him to be dead.
ACT 14:20 But after the disciples had surrounded him, he got up and went back into the city. On the next day he left with Barnabas for Derbe.
ACT 14:21 After they had proclaimed the good news in that city and made many disciples, they returned to Lystra,
ACT 14:22 They strengthened the souls of the disciples and encouraged them to continue in the faith, saying, “We must enter the kingdom of God through many persecutions.”
ACT 14:23 When they had appointed elders for them in the various churches, with prayer and fasting they entrusted them to the protection of the Lord in whom they had believed.
ACT 14:24 Then they passed through Pisidia and came into Pamphylia,
ACT 14:25 and when they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
ACT 14:26 From there they sailed back to Antioch, where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work they had now completed.
ACT 14:27 When they arrived and gathered the church together, they reported all the things God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith for the Gentiles.
ACT 14:28 So they spent considerable time with the disciples.
ACT 15:1 Now some men came down from Judea and began to teach the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
ACT 15:2 When Paul and Barnabas had a major argument and debate with them, the church appointed Paul and Barnabas and some others from among them to go up to meet with the apostles and elders in Jerusalem about this point of disagreement.
ACT 15:3 So they were sent on their way by the church, and as they passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, they were relating at length the conversion of the Gentiles and bringing great joy to all the brothers.
ACT 15:4 When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were received by the church and the apostles and the elders, and they reported all the things God had done with them.
ACT 15:5 But some from the religious party of the Pharisees who had believed stood up and said, “It is necessary to circumcise the Gentiles and to order them to observe the law of Moses.”
ACT 15:6 Both the apostles and the elders met together to deliberate about this matter.
ACT 15:7 After there had been much debate, Peter stood up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that some time ago God chose me to preach to the Gentiles so they would hear the message of the gospel and believe.
ACT 15:8 And God, who knows the heart, has testified to them by giving them the Holy Spirit just as he did to us,
ACT 15:9 and he made no distinction between them and us, cleansing their hearts by faith.
ACT 15:10 So now why are you putting God to the test by placing on the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our ancestors nor we have been able to bear?
ACT 15:11 On the contrary, we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same way as they are.”
ACT 15:12 The whole group kept quiet and listened to Barnabas and Paul while they explained all the miraculous signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.
ACT 15:13 After they stopped speaking, James replied, “Brothers, listen to me.
ACT 15:14 Simeon has explained how God first concerned himself to select from among the Gentiles a people for his name.
ACT 15:15 The words of the prophets agree with this, as it is written,
ACT 15:16 ‘ After this I will return, and I will rebuild the fallen tent of David;* I will rebuild its ruins and restore it,*
ACT 15:17 so that the rest of humanity may seek the Lord,* namely, all the Gentiles I have called to be my own,’ says the Lord,* who makes these things
ACT 15:18 known from long ago.
ACT 15:19 “Therefore I conclude that we should not cause extra difficulty for those among the Gentiles who are turning to God,
ACT 15:20 but that we should write them a letter telling them to abstain from things defiled by idols and from sexual immorality and from what has been strangled and from blood.
ACT 15:21 For Moses has had those who proclaim him in every town from ancient times, because he is read aloud in the synagogues every Sabbath.”
ACT 15:22 Then the apostles and elders, with the whole church, decided to send men chosen from among them, Judas called Barsabbas and Silas, leaders among the brothers, to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas.
ACT 15:23 They sent this letter with them: From the apostles and elders, your brothers, to the Gentile brothers and sisters in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, greetings!
ACT 15:24 Since we have heard that some have gone out from among us with no orders from us and have confused you, upsetting your minds by what they said,
ACT 15:25 we have unanimously decided to choose men to send to you along with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul,
ACT 15:26 who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ACT 15:27 Therefore we are sending Judas and Silas who will tell you these things themselves in person.
ACT 15:28 For it seemed best to the Holy Spirit and to us not to place any greater burden on you than these necessary rules:
ACT 15:29 that you abstain from meat that has been sacrificed to idols and from blood and from what has been strangled and from sexual immorality. If you keep yourselves from doing these things, you will do well. Farewell.
ACT 15:30 So when they were dismissed, they went down to Antioch, and after gathering the entire group together, they delivered the letter.
ACT 15:31 When they read it aloud, the people rejoiced at its encouragement.
ACT 15:32 Both Judas and Silas, who were prophets themselves, encouraged and strengthened the brothers with a long speech.
ACT 15:33 After they had spent some time there, they were sent off in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them.
ACT 15:34 
ACT 15:35 But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, teaching and proclaiming (along with many others) the word of the Lord.
ACT 15:36 After some days Paul said to Barnabas, “Let’s return and visit the brothers in every town where we proclaimed the word of the Lord to see how they are doing.”
ACT 15:37 Barnabas wanted to bring John called Mark along with them too,
ACT 15:38 but Paul insisted that they should not take along this one who had left them in Pamphylia and had not accompanied them in the work.
ACT 15:39 They had a sharp disagreement, so that they parted company. Barnabas took along Mark and sailed away to Cyprus,
ACT 15:40 but Paul chose Silas and set out, commended to the grace of the Lord by the brothers and sisters.
ACT 15:41 He passed through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.
ACT 16:1 He also came to Derbe A disciple named Timothy was there, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but whose father was a Greek.
ACT 16:2 The brothers in Lystra and Iconium spoke well of him.
ACT 16:3 Paul wanted Timothy to accompany him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for they all knew that his father was Greek.
ACT 16:4 As they went through the towns, they passed on the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and elders in Jerusalem for the Gentile believers to obey.
ACT 16:5 So the churches were being strengthened in the faith and were increasing in number every day.
ACT 16:6 They went through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been prevented by the Holy Spirit from speaking the message in the province of Asia.
ACT 16:7 When they came to Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them to do this,
ACT 16:8 so they passed through Mysia and went down to Troas.
ACT 16:9 A vision appeared to Paul during the night: A Macedonian man was standing there urging him, “Come over to Macedonia and help us!”
ACT 16:10 After Paul saw the vision, we attempted immediately to go over to Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to proclaim the good news to them.
ACT 16:11 We put out to sea from Troas and sailed a straight course to Samothrace, the next day to Neapolis,
ACT 16:12 and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of that district of Macedonia, a Roman colony. We stayed in this city for some days.
ACT 16:13 On the Sabbath day we went outside the city gate to the side of the river, where we thought there would be a place of prayer, and we sat down and began to speak to the women who had assembled there.
ACT 16:14 A woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth from the city of Thyatira, a God-fearing woman, listened to us. The Lord opened her heart to respond to what Paul was saying.
ACT 16:15 After she and her household were baptized, she urged us, “If you consider me to be a believer in the Lord, come and stay in my house.” And she persuaded us.
ACT 16:16 Now as we were going to the place of prayer, a slave girl met us who had a spirit that enabled her to foretell the future by supernatural means. She brought her owners a great profit by fortune-telling.
ACT 16:17 She followed behind Paul and us and kept crying out, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who are proclaiming to you the way of salvation.”
ACT 16:18 She continued to do this for many days. But Paul became greatly annoyed, and turned and said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!” And it came out of her at once.
ACT 16:19 But when her owners saw their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the authorities.
ACT 16:20 When they had brought them before the magistrates, they said, “These men are throwing our city into confusion. They are Jews
ACT 16:21 and are advocating customs that are not lawful for us to accept or practice, since we are Romans.”
ACT 16:22 The crowd joined the attack against them, and the magistrates tore the clothes off Paul and Silas and ordered them to be beaten with rods.
ACT 16:23 After they had beaten them severely, they threw them into prison and commanded the jailer to guard them securely.
ACT 16:24 Receiving such orders, he threw them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
ACT 16:25 About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the rest of the prisoners were listening to them.
ACT 16:26 Suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. Immediately all the doors flew open, and the bonds of all the prisoners came loose.
ACT 16:27 When the jailer woke up and saw the doors of the prison standing open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, because he assumed the prisoners had escaped.
ACT 16:28 But Paul called out loudly, “Do not harm yourself, for we are all here!”
ACT 16:29 Calling for lights, the jailer rushed in and fell down trembling at the feet of Paul and Silas.
ACT 16:30 Then he brought them outside and asked, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”
ACT 16:31 They replied, “Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your household.”
ACT 16:32 Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him, along with all those who were in his house.
ACT 16:33 At that hour of the night he took them and washed their wounds; then he and all his family were baptized right away.
ACT 16:34 The jailer brought them into his house and set food before them, and he rejoiced greatly that he had come to believe in God, together with his entire household.
ACT 16:35 At daybreak the magistrates sent their police officers, saying, “Release those men.”
ACT 16:36 The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, “The magistrates have sent orders to release you. So come out now and go in peace.”
ACT 16:37 But Paul said to the police officers, “They had us beaten in public without a proper trial – even though we are Roman citizens – and they threw us in prison. And now they want to send us away secretly? Absolutely not! They themselves must come and escort us out!”
ACT 16:38 The police officers reported these words to the magistrates. They were frightened when they heard Paul and Silas were Roman citizens
ACT 16:39 and came and apologized to them. After they brought them out, they asked them repeatedly to leave the city.
ACT 16:40 When they came out of the prison, they entered Lydia’s house, and when they saw the brothers, they encouraged them and then departed.
ACT 17:1 After they traveled through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
ACT 17:2 Paul went to the Jews in the synagogue, as he customarily did, and on three Sabbath days he addressed them from the scriptures,
ACT 17:3 explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer and to rise from the dead, saying, “This Jesus I am proclaiming to you is the Christ.”
ACT 17:4 Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, along with a large group of God-fearing Greeks and quite a few prominent women.
ACT 17:5 But the Jews became jealous, and gathering together some worthless men from the rabble in the marketplace, they formed a mob and set the city in an uproar. They attacked Jason’s house, trying to find Paul and Silas to bring them out to the assembly.
ACT 17:6 When they did not find them, they dragged Jason and some of the brothers before the city officials, screaming, “These people who have stirred up trouble throughout the world have come here too,
ACT 17:7 and Jason has welcomed them as guests! They are all acting against Caesar’s decrees, saying there is another king named Jesus!”
ACT 17:8 They caused confusion among the crowd and the city officials who heard these things.
ACT 17:9 After the city officials had received bail from Jason and the others, they released them.
ACT 17:10 The brothers sent Paul and Silas off to Berea at once, during the night. When they arrived, they went to the Jewish synagogue.
ACT 17:11 These Jews were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica, for they eagerly received the message, examining the scriptures carefully every day to see if these things were so.
ACT 17:12 Therefore many of them believed, along with quite a few prominent Greek women and men.
ACT 17:13 But when the Jews from Thessalonica heard that Paul had also proclaimed the word of God in Berea, they came there too, inciting and disturbing the crowds.
ACT 17:14 Then the brothers sent Paul away to the coast at once, but Silas and Timothy remained in Berea.
ACT 17:15 Those who accompanied Paul escorted him as far as Athens, and after receiving an order for Silas and Timothy to come to him as soon as possible, they left.
ACT 17:16 While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit was greatly upset because he saw the city was full of idols.
ACT 17:17 So he was addressing the Jews and the God-fearing Gentiles in the synagogue, and in the marketplace every day those who happened to be there.
ACT 17:18 Also some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers were conversing with him, and some were asking, “What does this foolish babbler want to say?” Others said, “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign gods.” (They said this because he was proclaiming the good news about Jesus and the resurrection.)
ACT 17:19 So they took Paul and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know what this new teaching is that you are proclaiming?
ACT 17:20 For you are bringing some surprising things to our ears, so we want to know what they mean.”
ACT 17:21 (All the Athenians and the foreigners who lived there used to spend their time in nothing else than telling or listening to something new.)
ACT 17:22 So Paul stood before the Areopagus and said, “Men of Athens, I see that you are very religious in all respects.
ACT 17:23 For as I went around and observed closely your objects of worship, I even found an altar with this inscription: ‘To an unknown god.’ Therefore what you worship without knowing it, this I proclaim to you.
ACT 17:24 The God who made the world and everything in it, who is Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by human hands,
ACT 17:25 nor is he served by human hands, as if he needed anything, because he himself gives life and breath and everything to everyone.
ACT 17:26 From one man he made every nation of the human race to inhabit the entire earth, determining their set times and the fixed limits of the places where they would live,
ACT 17:27 so that they would search for God and perhaps grope around for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us.
ACT 17:28 For in him we live and move about and exist, as even some of your own poets have said, ‘For we too are his offspring.’
ACT 17:29 So since we are God’s offspring, we should not think the deity is like gold or silver or stone, an image made by human skill and imagination.
ACT 17:30 Therefore, although God has overlooked such times of ignorance, he now commands all people everywhere to repent,
ACT 17:31 because he has set a day on which he is going to judge the world in righteousness, by a man whom he designated, having provided proof to everyone by raising him from the dead.”
ACT 17:32 Now when they heard about the resurrection from the dead, some began to scoff, but others said, “We will hear you again about this.”
ACT 17:33 So Paul left the Areopagus.
ACT 17:34 But some people joined him and believed. Among them were Dionysius, who was a member of the Areopagus, a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
ACT 18:1 After this Paul departed from Athens
ACT 18:2 There he found a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to depart from Rome. Paul approached them,
ACT 18:3 and because he worked at the same trade, he stayed with them and worked with them (for they were tentmakers by trade).
ACT 18:4 He addressed both Jews and Greeks in the synagogue every Sabbath, attempting to persuade them.
ACT 18:5 Now when Silas and Timothy arrived from Macedonia, Paul became wholly absorbed with proclaiming the word, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.
ACT 18:6 When they opposed him and reviled him, he protested by shaking out his clothes and said to them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am guiltless! From now on I will go to the Gentiles!”
ACT 18:7 Then Paul left the synagogue and went to the house of a person named Titius Justus, a Gentile who worshiped God, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
ACT 18:8 Crispus, the president of the synagogue, believed in the Lord together with his entire household, and many of the Corinthians who heard about it believed and were baptized.
ACT 18:9 The Lord said to Paul by a vision in the night, “Do not be afraid, but speak and do not be silent,
ACT 18:10 because I am with you, and no one will assault you to harm you, because I have many people in this city.”
ACT 18:11 So he stayed there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
ACT 18:12 Now while Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews attacked Paul together and brought him before the judgment seat,
ACT 18:13 saying, “This man is persuading people to worship God in a way contrary to the law!”
ACT 18:14 But just as Paul was about to speak, Gallio said to the Jews, “If it were a matter of some crime or serious piece of villainy, I would have been justified in accepting the complaint of you Jews,
ACT 18:15 but since it concerns points of disagreement about words and names and your own law, settle it yourselves. I will not be a judge of these things!”
ACT 18:16 Then he had them forced away from the judgment seat.
ACT 18:17 So they all seized Sosthenes, the president of the synagogue, and began to beat him in front of the judgment seat. Yet none of these things were of any concern to Gallio.
ACT 18:18 Paul, after staying many more days in Corinth, said farewell to the brothers and sailed away to Syria accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila. He had his hair cut off at Cenchrea because he had made a vow.
ACT 18:19 When they reached Ephesus, Paul left Priscilla and Aquila behind there, but he himself went into the synagogue and addressed the Jews.
ACT 18:20 When they asked him to stay longer, he would not consent,
ACT 18:21 but said farewell to them and added, “I will come back to you again if God wills.” Then he set sail from Ephesus,
ACT 18:22 and when he arrived at Caesarea,
ACT 18:23 After he spent some time there, Paul left and went through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
ACT 18:24 Now a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, arrived in Ephesus. He was an eloquent speaker, well-versed in the scriptures.
ACT 18:25 He had been instructed in the way of the Lord, and with great enthusiasm he spoke and taught accurately the facts about Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John.
ACT 18:26 He began to speak out fearlessly in the synagogue, but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained the way of God to him more accurately.
ACT 18:27 When Apollos wanted to cross over to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples to welcome him. When he arrived, he assisted greatly those who had believed by grace,
ACT 18:28 for he refuted the Jews vigorously in public debate, demonstrating from the scriptures that the Christ was Jesus.
ACT 19:1 While Apollos was in Corinth, He found some disciples there
ACT 19:2 and said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” They replied, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.”
ACT 19:3 So Paul said, “Into what then were you baptized?” “Into John’s baptism,” they replied.
ACT 19:4 Paul said, “John baptized with a baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was to come after him, that is, in Jesus.”
ACT 19:5 When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
ACT 19:6 and when Paul placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they began to speak in tongues and to prophesy.
ACT 19:7 (Now there were about twelve men in all.)
ACT 19:8 So Paul entered the synagogue and spoke out fearlessly for three months, addressing and convincing them about the kingdom of God.
ACT 19:9 But when some were stubborn and refused to believe, reviling the Way before the congregation, he left them and took the disciples with him, addressing them every day in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.
ACT 19:10 This went on for two years, so that all who lived in the province of Asia, both Jews and Greeks, heard the word of the Lord.
ACT 19:11 God was performing extraordinary miracles by Paul’s hands,
ACT 19:12 so that when even handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his body were brought to the sick, their diseases left them and the evil spirits went out of them.
ACT 19:13 But some itinerant Jewish exorcists tried to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who were possessed by evil spirits, saying, “I sternly warn you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.”
ACT 19:14 (Now seven sons of a man named Sceva, a Jewish high priest, were doing this.)
ACT 19:15 But the evil spirit replied to them, “I know about Jesus and I am acquainted with Paul, but who are you?”
ACT 19:16 Then the man who was possessed by the evil spirit jumped on them and beat them all into submission. He prevailed against them so that they fled from that house naked and wounded.
ACT 19:17 This became known to all who lived in Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks; fear came over them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was praised.
ACT 19:18 Many of those who had believed came forward, confessing and making their deeds known.
ACT 19:19 Large numbers of those who had practiced magic collected their books and burned them up in the presence of everyone. When the value of the books was added up, it was found to total fifty thousand silver coins.
ACT 19:20 In this way the word of the Lord continued to grow in power and to prevail.
ACT 19:21 Now after all these things had taken place, Paul resolved to go to Jerusalem, passing through Macedonia and Achaia. He said, “After I have been there, I must also see Rome.”
ACT 19:22 So after sending two of his assistants, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, he himself stayed on for a while in the province of Asia.
ACT 19:23 At that time a great disturbance took place concerning the Way.
ACT 19:24 For a man named Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought a great deal of business to the craftsmen.
ACT 19:25 He gathered these together, along with the workmen in similar trades, and said, “Men, you know that our prosperity comes from this business.
ACT 19:26 And you see and hear that this Paul has persuaded and turned away a large crowd, not only in Ephesus but in practically all of the province of Asia, by saying that gods made by hands are not gods at all.
ACT 19:27 There is danger not only that this business of ours will come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be regarded as nothing, and she whom all the province of Asia and the world worship will suffer the loss of her greatness.”
ACT 19:28 When they heard this they became enraged and began to shout, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
ACT 19:29 The city was filled with the uproar, and the crowd rushed to the theater together, dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus, the Macedonians who were Paul’s traveling companions.
ACT 19:30 But when Paul wanted to enter the public assembly, the disciples would not let him.
ACT 19:31 Even some of the provincial authorities who were his friends sent a message to him, urging him not to venture into the theater.
ACT 19:32 So then some were shouting one thing, some another, for the assembly was in confusion, and most of them did not know why they had met together.
ACT 19:33 Some of the crowd concluded it was about Alexander because the Jews had pushed him to the front. Alexander, gesturing with his hand, was wanting to make a defense before the public assembly.
ACT 19:34 But when they recognized that he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” for about two hours.
ACT 19:35 After the city secretary quieted the crowd, he said, “Men of Ephesus, what person is there who does not know that the city of the Ephesians is the keeper of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image that fell from heaven?
ACT 19:36 So because these facts are indisputable, you must keep quiet and not do anything reckless.
ACT 19:37 For you have brought these men here who are neither temple robbers nor blasphemers of our goddess.
ACT 19:38 If then Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a complaint against someone, the courts are open and there are proconsuls; let them bring charges against one another there.
ACT 19:39 But if you want anything in addition, it will have to be settled in a legal assembly.
ACT 19:40 For we are in danger of being charged with rioting today, since there is no cause we can give to explain this disorderly gathering.”
ACT 19:41 After he had said this, he dismissed the assembly.
ACT 20:1 After the disturbance had ended, Paul sent for the disciples, and after encouraging them and saying farewell, he left to go to Macedonia.
ACT 20:2 After he had gone through those regions and spoken many words of encouragement to the believers there, he came to Greece,
ACT 20:3 where he stayed for three months. Because the Jews had made a plot against him as he was intending to sail for Syria, he decided to return through Macedonia.
ACT 20:4 Paul was accompanied by Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea, and Timothy, as well as Tychicus and Trophimus from the province of Asia.
ACT 20:5 These had gone on ahead and were waiting for us in Troas.
ACT 20:6 We sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and within five days we came to the others in Troas, where we stayed for seven days.
ACT 20:7 On the first day of the week, when we met to break bread, Paul began to speak to the people, and because he intended to leave the next day, he extended his message until midnight.
ACT 20:8 (Now there were many lamps in the upstairs room where we were meeting.)
ACT 20:9 A young man named Eutychus, who was sitting in the window, was sinking into a deep sleep while Paul continued to speak for a long time. Fast asleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
ACT 20:10 But Paul went down, threw himself on the young man, put his arms around him, and said, “Do not be distressed, for he is still alive!”
ACT 20:11 Then Paul went back upstairs, and after he had broken bread and eaten, he talked with them a long time, until dawn. Then he left.
ACT 20:12 They took the boy home alive and were greatly comforted.
ACT 20:13 We went on ahead to the ship and put out to sea for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there, for he had arranged it this way. He himself was intending to go there by land.
ACT 20:14 When he met us in Assos, we took him aboard and went to Mitylene.
ACT 20:15 We set sail from there, and on the following day we arrived off Chios. The next day we approached Samos, and the day after that we arrived at Miletus.
ACT 20:16 For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus if possible, by the day of Pentecost.
ACT 20:17 From Miletus he sent a message to Ephesus, telling the elders of the church to come to him.
ACT 20:18 When they arrived, he said to them, “You yourselves know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I set foot in the province of Asia,
ACT 20:19 serving the Lord with all humility and with tears, and with the trials that happened to me because of the plots of the Jews.
ACT 20:20 You know that I did not hold back from proclaiming to you anything that would be helpful, and from teaching you publicly and from house to house,
ACT 20:21 testifying to both Jews and Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
ACT 20:22 And now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem without knowing what will happen to me there,
ACT 20:23 except that the Holy Spirit warns me in town after town that imprisonment and persecutions are waiting for me.
ACT 20:24 But I do not consider my life worth anything to myself, so that I may finish my task and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the good news of God’s grace.
ACT 20:25 “And now I know that none of you among whom I went around proclaiming the kingdom will see me again.
ACT 20:26 Therefore I declare to you today that I am innocent of the blood of you all.
ACT 20:27 For I did not hold back from announcing to you the whole purpose of God.
ACT 20:28 Watch out for yourselves and for all the flock of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the church of God that he obtained with the blood of his own Son.
ACT 20:29 I know that after I am gone fierce wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock.
ACT 20:30 Even from among your own group men will arise, teaching perversions of the truth to draw the disciples away after them.
ACT 20:31 Therefore be alert, remembering that night and day for three years I did not stop warning each one of you with tears.
ACT 20:32 And now I entrust you to God and to the message of his grace. This message is able to build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
ACT 20:33 I have desired no one’s silver or gold or clothing.
ACT 20:34 You yourselves know that these hands of mine provided for my needs and the needs of those who were with me.
ACT 20:35 By all these things, I have shown you that by working in this way we must help the weak, and remember the words of the Lord Jesus that he himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’”
ACT 20:36 When he had said these things, he knelt down with them all and prayed.
ACT 20:37 They all began to weep loudly, and hugged Paul and kissed him,
ACT 20:38 especially saddened by what he had said, that they were not going to see him again. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
ACT 21:1 After we tore ourselves away from them, we put out to sea, and sailing a straight course, we came to Cos, on the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
ACT 21:2 We found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, went aboard, and put out to sea.
ACT 21:3 After we sighted Cyprus and left it behind on our port side, we sailed on to Syria and put in at Tyre, because the ship was to unload its cargo there.
ACT 21:4 After we located the disciples, we stayed there seven days. They repeatedly told Paul through the Spirit not to set foot in Jerusalem.
ACT 21:5 When our time was over, we left and went on our way. All of them, with their wives and children, accompanied us outside of the city. After kneeling down on the beach and praying,
ACT 21:6 we said farewell to one another. Then we went aboard the ship, and they returned to their own homes.
ACT 21:7 We continued the voyage from Tyre and arrived at Ptolemais, and when we had greeted the brothers, we stayed with them for one day.
ACT 21:8 On the next day we left and came to Caesarea, and entered the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
ACT 21:9 (He had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.)
ACT 21:10 While we remained there for a number of days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
ACT 21:11 He came to us, took Paul’s belt, tied his own hands and feet with it, and said, “The Holy Spirit says this: ‘This is the way the Jews in Jerusalem will tie up the man whose belt this is, and will hand him over to the Gentiles.’”
ACT 21:12 When we heard this, both we and the local people begged him not to go up to Jerusalem.
ACT 21:13 Then Paul replied, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be tied up, but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
ACT 21:14 Because he could not be persuaded, we said no more except, “The Lord’s will be done.”
ACT 21:15 After these days we got ready and started up to Jerusalem.
ACT 21:16 Some of the disciples from Caesarea came along with us too, and brought us to the house of Mnason of Cyprus, a disciple from the earliest times, with whom we were to stay.
ACT 21:17 When we arrived in Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us gladly.
ACT 21:18 The next day Paul went in with us to see James, and all the elders were there.
ACT 21:19 When Paul had greeted them, he began to explain in detail what God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
ACT 21:20 When they heard this, they praised God. Then they said to him, “You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are who have believed, and they are all ardent observers of the law.
ACT 21:21 They have been informed about you – that you teach all the Jews now living among the Gentiles to abandon Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or live according to our customs.
ACT 21:22 What then should we do? They will no doubt hear that you have come.
ACT 21:23 So do what we tell you: We have four men who have taken a vow;
ACT 21:24 take them and purify yourself along with them and pay their expenses, so that they may have their heads shaved. Then everyone will know there is nothing in what they have been told about you, but that you yourself live in conformity with the law.
ACT 21:25 But regarding the Gentiles who have believed, we have written a letter, having decided that they should avoid meat that has been sacrificed to idols and blood and what has been strangled and sexual immorality.”
ACT 21:26 Then Paul took the men the next day, and after he had purified himself along with them, he went to the temple and gave notice of the completion of the days of purification, when the sacrifice would be offered for each of them.
ACT 21:27 When the seven days were almost over, the Jews from the province of Asia who had seen him in the temple area stirred up the whole crowd and seized him,
ACT 21:28 shouting, “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people, our law, and this sanctuary! Furthermore he has brought Greeks into the inner courts of the temple and made this holy place ritually unclean!”
ACT 21:29 (For they had seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him previously, and they assumed Paul had brought him into the inner temple courts.)
ACT 21:30 The whole city was stirred up, and the people rushed together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple courts, and immediately the doors were shut.
ACT 21:31 While they were trying to kill him, a report was sent up to the commanding officer of the cohort that all Jerusalem was in confusion.
ACT 21:32 He immediately took soldiers and centurions and ran down to the crowd. When they saw the commanding officer and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
ACT 21:33 Then the commanding officer came up and arrested him and ordered him to be tied up with two chains; he then asked who he was and what he had done.
ACT 21:34 But some in the crowd shouted one thing, and others something else, and when the commanding officer was unable to find out the truth because of the disturbance, he ordered Paul to be brought into the barracks.
ACT 21:35 When he came to the steps, Paul had to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the mob,
ACT 21:36 for a crowd of people followed them, screaming, “Away with him!”
ACT 21:37 As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he said to the commanding officer, “May I say something to you?” The officer replied, “Do you know Greek?
ACT 21:38 Then you’re not that Egyptian who started a rebellion and led the four thousand men of the ‘Assassins’ into the wilderness some time ago?”
ACT 21:39 Paul answered, “I am a Jew from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of an important city. Please allow me to speak to the people.”
ACT 21:40 When the commanding officer had given him permission, Paul stood on the steps and gestured to the people with his hand. When they had become silent, he addressed them in Aramaic,
ACT 22:1 “Brothers and fathers, listen to my defense that I now make to you.”
ACT 22:2 (When they heard that he was addressing them in Aramaic, they became even quieter.) Then Paul said,
ACT 22:3 “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, but brought up in this city, educated with strictness under Gamaliel according to the law of our ancestors, and was zealous for God just as all of you are today.
ACT 22:4 I persecuted this Way even to the point of death, tying up both men and women and putting them in prison,
ACT 22:5 as both the high priest and the whole council of elders can testify about me. From them I also received letters to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to make arrests there and bring the prisoners to Jerusalem to be punished.
ACT 22:6 As I was en route and near Damascus, about noon a very bright light from heaven suddenly flashed around me.
ACT 22:7 Then I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
ACT 22:8 I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ He said to me, ‘I am Jesus the Nazarene, whom you are persecuting.’
ACT 22:9 Those who were with me saw the light, but did not understand the voice of the one who was speaking to me.
ACT 22:10 So I asked, ‘What should I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me, ‘Get up and go to Damascus; there you will be told about everything that you have been designated to do.’
ACT 22:11 Since I could not see because of the brilliance of that light, I came to Damascus led by the hand of those who were with me.
ACT 22:12 A man named Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well spoken of by all the Jews who live there,
ACT 22:13 came to me and stood beside me and said to me, ‘Brother Saul, regain your sight!’ And at that very moment I looked up and saw him.
ACT 22:14 Then he said, ‘The God of our ancestors has already chosen you to know his will, to see the Righteous One, and to hear a command from his mouth,
ACT 22:15 because you will be his witness to all people of what you have seen and heard.
ACT 22:16 And now what are you waiting for? Get up, be baptized, and have your sins washed away, calling on his name.’
ACT 22:17 When I returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
ACT 22:18 and saw the Lord saying to me, ‘Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your testimony about me.’
ACT 22:19 I replied, ‘Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat those in the various synagogues who believed in you.
ACT 22:20 And when the blood of your witness Stephen was shed, I myself was standing nearby, approving, and guarding the cloaks of those who were killing him.’
ACT 22:21 Then he said to me, ‘Go, because I will send you far away to the Gentiles.’”
ACT 22:22 The crowd was listening to him until he said this. Then they raised their voices and shouted, “Away with this man from the earth! For he should not be allowed to live!”
ACT 22:23 While they were screaming and throwing off their cloaks and tossing dust in the air,
ACT 22:24 the commanding officer ordered Paul to be brought back into the barracks. He told them to interrogate Paul by beating him with a lash so that he could find out the reason the crowd was shouting at Paul in this way.
ACT 22:25 When they had stretched him out for the lash, Paul said to the centurion standing nearby, “Is it legal for you to lash a man who is a Roman citizen without a proper trial?”
ACT 22:26 When the centurion heard this, he went to the commanding officer and reported it, saying, “What are you about to do? For this man is a Roman citizen.”
ACT 22:27 So the commanding officer came and asked Paul, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?” He replied, “Yes.”
ACT 22:28 The commanding officer answered, “I acquired this citizenship with a large sum of money.” “But I was even born a citizen,” Paul replied.
ACT 22:29 Then those who were about to interrogate him stayed away from him, and the commanding officer was frightened when he realized that Paul was a Roman citizen and that he had had him tied up.
ACT 22:30 The next day, because the commanding officer wanted to know the true reason Paul was being accused by the Jews, he released him and ordered the chief priests and the whole council to assemble. He then brought Paul down and had him stand before them.
ACT 23:1 Paul looked directly at the council and said, “Brothers, I have lived my life with a clear conscience before God to this day.”
ACT 23:2 At that the high priest Ananias ordered those standing near Paul to strike him on the mouth.
ACT 23:3 Then Paul said to him, “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit there judging me according to the law, and in violation of the law you order me to be struck?”
ACT 23:4 Those standing near him said, “Do you dare insult God’s high priest?”
ACT 23:5 Paul replied, “I did not realize, brothers, that he was the high priest, for it is written, ‘ You must not speak evil about a ruler of your people.’”
ACT 23:6 Then when Paul noticed that part of them were Sadducees and the others Pharisees, he shouted out in the council, “Brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. I am on trial concerning the hope of the resurrection of the dead!”
ACT 23:7 When he said this, an argument began between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
ACT 23:8 (For the Sadducees say there is no resurrection, or angel, or spirit, but the Pharisees acknowledge them all.)
ACT 23:9 There was a great commotion, and some experts in the law from the party of the Pharisees stood up and protested strongly, “We find nothing wrong with this man. What if a spirit or an angel has spoken to him?”
ACT 23:10 When the argument became so great the commanding officer feared that they would tear Paul to pieces, he ordered the detachment to go down, take him away from them by force, and bring him into the barracks.
ACT 23:11 The following night the Lord stood near Paul and said, “Have courage, for just as you have testified about me in Jerusalem, so you must also testify in Rome.”
ACT 23:12 When morning came, the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink anything until they had killed Paul.
ACT 23:13 There were more than forty of them who formed this conspiracy.
ACT 23:14 They went to the chief priests and the elders and said, “We have bound ourselves with a solemn oath not to partake of anything until we have killed Paul.
ACT 23:15 So now you and the council request the commanding officer to bring him down to you, as if you were going to determine his case by conducting a more thorough inquiry. We are ready to kill him before he comes near this place.”
ACT 23:16 But when the son of Paul’s sister heard about the ambush, he came and entered the barracks and told Paul.
ACT 23:17 Paul called one of the centurions and said, “Take this young man to the commanding officer, for he has something to report to him.”
ACT 23:18 So the centurion took him and brought him to the commanding officer and said, “The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you.”
ACT 23:19 The commanding officer took him by the hand, withdrew privately, and asked, “What is it that you want to report to me?”
ACT 23:20 He replied, “The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as if they were going to inquire more thoroughly about him.
ACT 23:21 So do not let them persuade you to do this, because more than forty of them are lying in ambush for him. They have bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink anything until they have killed him, and now they are ready, waiting for you to agree to their request.”
ACT 23:22 Then the commanding officer sent the young man away, directing him, “Tell no one that you have reported these things to me.”
ACT 23:23 Then he summoned two of the centurions and said, “Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea along with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen by nine o’clock tonight,
ACT 23:24 and provide mounts for Paul to ride so that he may be brought safely to Felix the governor.”
ACT 23:25 He wrote a letter that went like this:
ACT 23:26 Claudius Lysias to His Excellency Governor Felix, greetings.
ACT 23:27 This man was seized by the Jews and they were about to kill him, when I came up with the detachment and rescued him, because I had learned that he was a Roman citizen.
ACT 23:28 Since I wanted to know what charge they were accusing him of, I brought him down to their council.
ACT 23:29 I found he was accused with reference to controversial questions about their law, but no charge against him deserved death or imprisonment.
ACT 23:30 When I was informed there would be a plot against this man, I sent him to you at once, also ordering his accusers to state their charges against him before you.
ACT 23:31 So the soldiers, in accordance with their orders, took Paul and brought him to Antipatris during the night.
ACT 23:32 The next day they let the horsemen go on with him, and they returned to the barracks.
ACT 23:33 When the horsemen came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, they also presented Paul to him.
ACT 23:34 When the governor had read the letter, he asked what province he was from. When he learned that he was from Cilicia,
ACT 23:35 he said, “I will give you a hearing when your accusers arrive too.” Then he ordered that Paul be kept under guard in Herod’s palace.
ACT 24:1 After five days the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and an attorney named Tertullus, and they brought formal charges against Paul to the governor.
ACT 24:2 When Paul had been summoned, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, “We have experienced a lengthy time of peace through your rule, and reforms are being made in this nation through your foresight.
ACT 24:3 Most excellent Felix, we acknowledge this everywhere and in every way with all gratitude.
ACT 24:4 But so that I may not delay you any further, I beg you to hear us briefly with your customary graciousness.
ACT 24:5 For we have found this man to be a troublemaker, one who stirs up riots among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
ACT 24:6 He even tried to desecrate the temple, so we arrested him.
ACT 24:7 
ACT 24:8 When you examine him yourself, you will be able to learn from him about all these things we are accusing him of doing.”
ACT 24:9 The Jews also joined in the verbal attack, claiming that these things were true.
ACT 24:10 When the governor gestured for him to speak, Paul replied, “Because I know that you have been a judge over this nation for many years, I confidently make my defense.
ACT 24:11 As you can verify for yourself, not more than twelve days ago I went up to Jerusalem to worship.
ACT 24:12 They did not find me arguing with anyone or stirring up a crowd in the temple courts or in the synagogues or throughout the city,
ACT 24:13 nor can they prove to you the things they are accusing me of doing.
ACT 24:14 But I confess this to you, that I worship the God of our ancestors according to the Way (which they call a sect), believing everything that is according to the law and that is written in the prophets.
ACT 24:15 I have a hope in God (a hope that these men themselves accept too) that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.
ACT 24:16 This is the reason I do my best to always have a clear conscience toward God and toward people.
ACT 24:17 After several years I came to bring to my people gifts for the poor and to present offerings,
ACT 24:18 which I was doing when they found me in the temple, ritually purified, without a crowd or a disturbance.
ACT 24:19 But there are some Jews from the province of Asia who should be here before you and bring charges, if they have anything against me.
ACT 24:20 Or these men here should tell what crime they found me guilty of when I stood before the council,
ACT 24:21 other than this one thing I shouted out while I stood before them: ‘I am on trial before you today concerning the resurrection of the dead.’”
ACT 24:22 Then Felix, who understood the facts concerning the Way more accurately, adjourned their hearing, saying, “When Lysias the commanding officer comes down, I will decide your case.”
ACT 24:23 He ordered the centurion to guard Paul, but to let him have some freedom, and not to prevent any of his friends from meeting his needs.
ACT 24:24 Some days later, when Felix arrived with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, he sent for Paul and heard him speak about faith in Christ Jesus.
ACT 24:25 While Paul was discussing righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became frightened and said, “Go away for now, and when I have an opportunity, I will send for you.”
ACT 24:26 At the same time he was also hoping that Paul would give him money, and for this reason he sent for Paul as often as possible and talked with him.
ACT 24:27 After two years had passed, Porcius Festus succeeded Felix, and because he wanted to do the Jews a favor, Felix left Paul in prison.
ACT 25:1 Now three days after Festus arrived in the province, he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
ACT 25:2 So the chief priests and the most prominent men of the Jews brought formal charges against Paul to him.
ACT 25:3 Requesting him to do them a favor against Paul, they urged Festus to summon him to Jerusalem, planning an ambush to kill him along the way.
ACT 25:4 Then Festus replied that Paul was being kept at Caesarea, and he himself intended to go there shortly.
ACT 25:5 “So,” he said, “let your leaders go down there with me, and if this man has done anything wrong, they may bring charges against him.”
ACT 25:6 After Festus had stayed not more than eight or ten days among them, he went down to Caesarea, and the next day he sat on the judgment seat and ordered Paul to be brought.
ACT 25:7 When he arrived, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many serious charges that they were not able to prove.
ACT 25:8 Paul said in his defense, “I have committed no offense against the Jewish law or against the temple or against Caesar.”
ACT 25:9 But Festus, wanting to do the Jews a favor, asked Paul, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be tried before me there on these charges?”
ACT 25:10 Paul replied, “I am standing before Caesar’s judgment seat, where I should be tried. I have done nothing wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well.
ACT 25:11 If then I am in the wrong and have done anything that deserves death, I am not trying to escape dying, but if not one of their charges against me is true, no one can hand me over to them. I appeal to Caesar!”
ACT 25:12 Then, after conferring with his council, Festus replied, “You have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar you will go!”
ACT 25:13 After several days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea to pay their respects to Festus.
ACT 25:14 While they were staying there many days, Festus explained Paul’s case to the king to get his opinion, saying, “There is a man left here as a prisoner by Felix.
ACT 25:15 When I was in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me about him, asking for a sentence of condemnation against him.
ACT 25:16 I answered them that it was not the custom of the Romans to hand over anyone before the accused had met his accusers face to face and had been given an opportunity to make a defense against the accusation.
ACT 25:17 So after they came back here with me, I did not postpone the case, but the next day I sat on the judgment seat and ordered the man to be brought.
ACT 25:18 When his accusers stood up, they did not charge him with any of the evil deeds I had suspected.
ACT 25:19 Rather they had several points of disagreement with him about their own religion and about a man named Jesus who was dead, whom Paul claimed to be alive.
ACT 25:20 Because I was at a loss how I could investigate these matters, I asked if he were willing to go to Jerusalem and be tried there on these charges.
ACT 25:21 But when Paul appealed to be kept in custody for the decision of His Majesty the Emperor, I ordered him to be kept under guard until I could send him to Caesar.”
ACT 25:22 Agrippa said to Festus, “I would also like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” he replied, “you will hear him.”
ACT 25:23 So the next day Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp and entered the audience hall, along with the senior military officers and the prominent men of the city. When Festus gave the order, Paul was brought in.
ACT 25:24 Then Festus said, “King Agrippa, and all you who are present here with us, you see this man about whom the entire Jewish populace petitioned me both in Jerusalem and here, shouting loudly that he ought not to live any longer.
ACT 25:25 But I found that he had done nothing that deserved death, and when he appealed to His Majesty the Emperor, I decided to send him.
ACT 25:26 But I have nothing definite to write to my lord about him. Therefore I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that after this preliminary hearing I may have something to write.
ACT 25:27 For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner without clearly indicating the charges against him.”
ACT 26:1 So Agrippa said to Paul, “You have permission to speak for yourself.” Then Paul held out his hand and began his defense:
ACT 26:2 “Regarding all the things I have been accused of by the Jews, King Agrippa, I consider myself fortunate that I am about to make my defense before you today,
ACT 26:3 because you are especially familiar with all the customs and controversial issues of the Jews. Therefore I ask you to listen to me patiently.
ACT 26:4 Now all the Jews know the way I lived from my youth, spending my life from the beginning among my own people and in Jerusalem.
ACT 26:5 They know, because they have known me from time past, if they are willing to testify, that according to the strictest party of our religion, I lived as a Pharisee.
ACT 26:6 And now I stand here on trial because of my hope in the promise made by God to our ancestors,
ACT 26:7 a promise that our twelve tribes hope to attain as they earnestly serve God night and day. Concerning this hope the Jews are accusing me, Your Majesty!
ACT 26:8 Why do you people think it is unbelievable that God raises the dead?
ACT 26:9 Of course, I myself was convinced that it was necessary to do many things hostile to the name of Jesus the Nazarene.
ACT 26:10 And that is what I did in Jerusalem: Not only did I lock up many of the saints in prisons by the authority I received from the chief priests, but I also cast my vote against them when they were sentenced to death.
ACT 26:11 I punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to force them to blaspheme. Because I was so furiously enraged at them, I went to persecute them even in foreign cities.
ACT 26:12 “While doing this very thing, as I was going to Damascus with authority and complete power from the chief priests,
ACT 26:13 about noon along the road, Your Majesty, I saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining everywhere around me and those traveling with me.
ACT 26:14 When we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in Aramaic, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? You are hurting yourself by kicking against the goads.’
ACT 26:15 So I said, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord replied, ‘I am Jesus whom you are persecuting.
ACT 26:16 But get up and stand on your feet, for I have appeared to you for this reason, to designate you in advance as a servant and witness to the things you have seen and to the things in which I will appear to you.
ACT 26:17 I will rescue you from your own people and from the Gentiles, to whom I am sending you
ACT 26:18 to open their eyes so that they turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a share among those who are sanctified by faith in me.’
ACT 26:19 “Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision,
ACT 26:20 but I declared to those in Damascus first, and then to those in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, performing deeds consistent with repentance.
ACT 26:21 For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple courts and were trying to kill me.
ACT 26:22 I have experienced help from God to this day, and so I stand testifying to both small and great, saying nothing except what the prophets and Moses said was going to happen:
ACT 26:23 that the Christ was to suffer and be the first to rise from the dead, to proclaim light both to our people and to the Gentiles.”
ACT 26:24 As Paul was saying these things in his defense, Festus exclaimed loudly, “You have lost your mind, Paul! Your great learning is driving you insane!”
ACT 26:25 But Paul replied, “I have not lost my mind, most excellent Festus, but am speaking true and rational words.
ACT 26:26 For the king knows about these things, and I am speaking freely to him, because I cannot believe that any of these things has escaped his notice, for this was not done in a corner.
ACT 26:27 Do you believe the prophets, King Agrippa? I know that you believe.”
ACT 26:28 Agrippa said to Paul, “In such a short time are you persuading me to become a Christian?”
ACT 26:29 Paul replied, “I pray to God that whether in a short or a long time not only you but also all those who are listening to me today could become such as I am, except for these chains.”
ACT 26:30 So the king got up, and with him the governor and Bernice and those sitting with them,
ACT 26:31 and as they were leaving they said to one another, “This man is not doing anything deserving death or imprisonment.”
ACT 26:32 Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
ACT 27:1 When it was decided we would sail to Italy, they handed over Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion of the Augustan Cohort named Julius.
ACT 27:2 We went on board a ship from Adramyttium that was about to sail to various ports along the coast of the province of Asia and put out to sea, accompanied by Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica.
ACT 27:3 The next day we put in at Sidon, and Julius, treating Paul kindly, allowed him to go to his friends so they could provide him with what he needed.
ACT 27:4 From there we put out to sea and sailed under the lee of Cyprus because the winds were against us.
ACT 27:5 After we had sailed across the open sea off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we put in at Myra in Lycia.
ACT 27:6 There the centurion found a ship from Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put us aboard it.
ACT 27:7 We sailed slowly for many days and arrived with difficulty off Cnidus. Because the wind prevented us from going any farther, we sailed under the lee of Crete off Salmone.
ACT 27:8 With difficulty we sailed along the coast of Crete and came to a place called Fair Havens that was near the town of Lasea.
ACT 27:9 Since considerable time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous because the fast was already over, Paul advised them,
ACT 27:10 “Men, I can see the voyage is going to end in disaster and great loss not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives.”
ACT 27:11 But the centurion was more convinced by the captain and the ship’s owner than by what Paul said.
ACT 27:12 Because the harbor was not suitable to spend the winter in, the majority decided to put out to sea from there. They hoped that somehow they could reach Phoenix, a harbor of Crete facing southwest and northwest, and spend the winter there.
ACT 27:13 When a gentle south wind sprang up, they thought they could carry out their purpose, so they weighed anchor and sailed close along the coast of Crete.
ACT 27:14 Not long after this, a hurricane-force wind called the northeaster blew down from the island.
ACT 27:15 When the ship was caught in it and could not head into the wind, we gave way to it and were driven along.
ACT 27:16 As we ran under the lee of a small island called Cauda, we were able with difficulty to get the ship’s boat under control.
ACT 27:17 After the crew had hoisted it aboard, they used supports to undergird the ship. Fearing they would run aground on the Syrtis, they lowered the sea anchor, thus letting themselves be driven along.
ACT 27:18 The next day, because we were violently battered by the storm, they began throwing the cargo overboard,
ACT 27:19 and on the third day they threw the ship’s gear overboard with their own hands.
ACT 27:20 When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and a violent storm continued to batter us, we finally abandoned all hope of being saved.
ACT 27:21 Since many of them had no desire to eat, Paul stood up among them and said, “Men, you should have listened to me and not put out to sea from Crete, thus avoiding this damage and loss.
ACT 27:22 And now I advise you to keep up your courage, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only the ship will be lost.
ACT 27:23 For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve came to me
ACT 27:24 and said, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul! You must stand before Caesar, and God has graciously granted you the safety of all who are sailing with you.’
ACT 27:25 Therefore keep up your courage, men, for I have faith in God that it will be just as I have been told.
ACT 27:26 But we must run aground on some island.”
ACT 27:27 When the fourteenth night had come, while we were being driven across the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors suspected they were approaching some land.
ACT 27:28 They took soundings and found the water was twenty fathoms deep; when they had sailed a little farther they took soundings again and found it was fifteen fathoms deep.
ACT 27:29 Because they were afraid that we would run aground on the rocky coast, they threw out four anchors from the stern and wished for day to appear.
ACT 27:30 Then when the sailors tried to escape from the ship and were lowering the ship’s boat into the sea, pretending that they were going to put out anchors from the bow,
ACT 27:31 Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, “Unless these men stay with the ship, you cannot be saved.”
ACT 27:32 Then the soldiers cut the ropes of the ship’s boat and let it drift away.
ACT 27:33 As day was about to dawn, Paul urged them all to take some food, saying, “Today is the fourteenth day you have been in suspense and have gone without food; you have eaten nothing.
ACT 27:34 Therefore I urge you to take some food, for this is important for your survival. For not one of you will lose a hair from his head.”
ACT 27:35 After he said this, Paul took bread and gave thanks to God in front of them all, broke it, and began to eat.
ACT 27:36 So all of them were encouraged and took food themselves.
ACT 27:37 (We were in all two hundred seventy-six persons on the ship.)
ACT 27:38 When they had eaten enough to be satisfied, they lightened the ship by throwing the wheat into the sea.
ACT 27:39 When day came, they did not recognize the land, but they noticed a bay with a beach, where they decided to run the ship aground if they could.
ACT 27:40 So they slipped the anchors and left them in the sea, at the same time loosening the linkage that bound the steering oars together. Then they hoisted the foresail to the wind and steered toward the beach.
ACT 27:41 But they encountered a patch of crosscurrents and ran the ship aground; the bow stuck fast and could not be moved, but the stern was being broken up by the force of the waves.
ACT 27:42 Now the soldiers’ plan was to kill the prisoners so that none of them would escape by swimming away.
ACT 27:43 But the centurion, wanting to save Paul’s life, prevented them from carrying out their plan. He ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land,
ACT 27:44 and the rest were to follow, some on planks and some on pieces of the ship. And in this way all were brought safely to land.
ACT 28:1 After we had safely reached shore, we learned that the island was called Malta.
ACT 28:2 The local inhabitants showed us extraordinary kindness, for they built a fire and welcomed us all because it had started to rain and was cold.
ACT 28:3 When Paul had gathered a bundle of brushwood and was putting it on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened itself on his hand.
ACT 28:4 When the local people saw the creature hanging from Paul’s hand, they said to one another, “No doubt this man is a murderer! Although he has escaped from the sea, Justice herself has not allowed him to live!”
ACT 28:5 However, Paul shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
ACT 28:6 But they were expecting that he was going to swell up or suddenly drop dead. So after they had waited a long time and had seen nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and said he was a god.
ACT 28:7 Now in the region around that place were fields belonging to the chief official of the island, named Publius, who welcomed us and entertained us hospitably as guests for three days.
ACT 28:8 The father of Publius lay sick in bed, suffering from fever and dysentery. Paul went in to see him and after praying, placed his hands on him and healed him.
ACT 28:9 After this had happened, many of the people on the island who were sick also came and were healed.
ACT 28:10 They also bestowed many honors, and when we were preparing to sail, they gave us all the supplies we needed.
ACT 28:11 After three months we put out to sea in an Alexandrian ship that had wintered at the island and had the “Heavenly Twins” as its figurehead.
ACT 28:12 We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three days.
ACT 28:13 From there we cast off and arrived at Rhegium, and after one day a south wind sprang up and on the second day we came to Puteoli.
ACT 28:14 There we found some brothers and were invited to stay with them seven days. And in this way we came to Rome.
ACT 28:15 The brothers from there, when they heard about us, came as far as the Forum of Appius and Three Taverns to meet us. When he saw them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
ACT 28:16 When we entered Rome, Paul was allowed to live by himself, with the soldier who was guarding him.
ACT 28:17 After three days Paul called the local Jewish leaders together. When they had assembled, he said to them, “Brothers, although I had done nothing against our people or the customs of our ancestors, from Jerusalem I was handed over as a prisoner to the Romans.
ACT 28:18 When they had heard my case, they wanted to release me, because there was no basis for a death sentence against me.
ACT 28:19 But when the Jews objected, I was forced to appeal to Caesar – not that I had some charge to bring against my own people.
ACT 28:20 So for this reason I have asked to see you and speak with you, for I am bound with this chain because of the hope of Israel.”
ACT 28:21 They replied, “We have received no letters from Judea about you, nor have any of the brothers come from there and reported or said anything bad about you.
ACT 28:22 But we would like to hear from you what you think, for regarding this sect we know that people everywhere speak against it.”
ACT 28:23 They set a day to meet with him, and they came to him where he was staying in even greater numbers. From morning until evening he explained things to them, testifying about the kingdom of God and trying to convince them about Jesus from both the law of Moses and the prophets.
ACT 28:24 Some were convinced by what he said, but others refused to believe.
ACT 28:25 So they began to leave, unable to agree among themselves, after Paul made one last statement: “The Holy Spirit spoke rightly to your ancestors through the prophet Isaiah
ACT 28:26 when he said, ‘ Go to this people and say, “ You will keep on hearing, but will never understand, and you will keep on looking, but will never perceive.
ACT 28:27 For the heart of this people has become dull, and their ears are hard of hearing, and they have closed their eyes, so that they would not see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them.”’
ACT 28:28 “Therefore be advised that this salvation from God has been sent to the Gentiles; they will listen!”
ACT 28:29 
ACT 28:30 Paul lived there two whole years in his own rented quarters and welcomed all who came to him,
ACT 28:31 proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with complete boldness and without restriction.
ROM 1:1 From Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God.
ROM 1:2 This gospel he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy scriptures,
ROM 1:3 concerning his Son who was a descendant of David with reference to the flesh,
ROM 1:4 who was appointed the Son-of-God-in-power according to the Holy Spirit by the resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord.
ROM 1:5 Through him we have received grace and our apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith among all the Gentiles on behalf of his name.
ROM 1:6 You also are among them, called to belong to Jesus Christ.
ROM 1:7 To all those loved by God in Rome, called to be saints: Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
ROM 1:8 First of all, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world.
ROM 1:9 For God, whom I serve in my spirit by preaching the gospel of his Son, is my witness that I continually remember you
ROM 1:10 and I always ask in my prayers, if perhaps now at last I may succeed in visiting you according to the will of God.
ROM 1:11 For I long to see you, so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to strengthen you,
ROM 1:12 that is, that we may be mutually comforted by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.
ROM 1:13 I do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that I often intended to come to you (and was prevented until now), so that I may have some fruit even among you, just as I already have among the rest of the Gentiles.
ROM 1:14 I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish.
ROM 1:15 Thus I am eager also to preach the gospel to you who are in Rome.
ROM 1:16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is God’s power for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
ROM 1:17 For the righteousness of God is revealed in the gospel from faith to faith, just as it is written, “ The righteous by faith will live.”
ROM 1:18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of people who suppress the truth by their unrighteousness,
ROM 1:19 because what can be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them.
ROM 1:20 For since the creation of the world his invisible attributes – his eternal power and divine nature – have been clearly seen, because they are understood through what has been made. So people are without excuse.
ROM 1:21 For although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God or give him thanks, but they became futile in their thoughts and their senseless hearts were darkened.
ROM 1:22 Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools
ROM 1:23 and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for an image resembling mortal human beings or birds or four-footed animals or reptiles.
ROM 1:24 Therefore God gave them over in the desires of their hearts to impurity, to dishonor their bodies among themselves.
ROM 1:25 They exchanged the truth of God for a lie and worshiped and served the creation rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever! Amen.
ROM 1:26 For this reason God gave them over to dishonorable passions. For their women exchanged the natural sexual relations for unnatural ones,
ROM 1:27 and likewise the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed in their passions for one another. Men committed shameless acts with men and received in themselves the due penalty for their error.
ROM 1:28 And just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them over to a depraved mind, to do what should not be done.
ROM 1:29 They are filled with every kind of unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, malice. They are rife with envy, murder, strife, deceit, hostility. They are gossips,
ROM 1:30 slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, contrivers of all sorts of evil, disobedient to parents,
ROM 1:31 senseless, covenant-breakers, heartless, ruthless.
ROM 1:32 Although they fully know God’s righteous decree that those who practice such things deserve to die, they not only do them but also approve of those who practice them.
ROM 2:1 Therefore you are without excuse, whoever you are, when you judge someone else. For on whatever grounds you judge another, you condemn yourself, because you who judge practice the same things.
ROM 2:2 Now we know that God’s judgment is in accordance with truth against those who practice such things.
ROM 2:3 And do you think, whoever you are, when you judge those who practice such things and yet do them yourself, that you will escape God’s judgment?
ROM 2:4 Or do you have contempt for the wealth of his kindness, forbearance, and patience, and yet do not know that God’s kindness leads you to repentance?
ROM 2:5 But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourselves in the day of wrath, when God’s righteous judgment is revealed!
ROM 2:6 He will reward each one according to his works:
ROM 2:7 eternal life to those who by perseverance in good works seek glory and honor and immortality,
ROM 2:8 but wrath and anger to those who live in selfish ambition and do not obey the truth but follow unrighteousness.
ROM 2:9 There will be affliction and distress on everyone who does evil, on the Jew first and also the Greek,
ROM 2:10 but glory and honor and peace for everyone who does good, for the Jew first and also the Greek.
ROM 2:11 For there is no partiality with God.
ROM 2:12 For all who have sinned apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who have sinned under the law will be judged by the law.
ROM 2:13 For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous before God, but those who do the law will be declared righteous.
ROM 2:14 For whenever the Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature the things required by the law, these who do not have the law are a law to themselves.
ROM 2:15 They show that the work of the law is written in their hearts, as their conscience bears witness and their conflicting thoughts accuse or else defend them,
ROM 2:16 on the day when God will judge the secrets of human hearts, according to my gospel through Christ Jesus.
ROM 2:17 But if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law and boast of your relationship to God
ROM 2:18 and know his will and approve the superior things because you receive instruction from the law,
ROM 2:19 and if you are convinced that you yourself are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,
ROM 2:20 an educator of the senseless, a teacher of little children, because you have in the law the essential features of knowledge and of the truth –
ROM 2:21 therefore you who teach someone else, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal?
ROM 2:22 You who tell others not to commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
ROM 2:23 You who boast in the law dishonor God by transgressing the law!
ROM 2:24 For just as it is written, “ the name of God is being blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.”
ROM 2:25 For circumcision has its value if you practice the law, but if you break the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
ROM 2:26 Therefore if the uncircumcised man obeys the righteous requirements of the law, will not his uncircumcision be regarded as circumcision?
ROM 2:27 And will not the physically uncircumcised man who keeps the law judge you who, despite the written code and circumcision, transgress the law?
ROM 2:28 For a person is not a Jew who is one outwardly, nor is circumcision something that is outward in the flesh,
ROM 2:29 but someone is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is of the heart by the Spirit and not by the written code. This person’s praise is not from people but from God.
ROM 3:1 Therefore what advantage does the Jew have, or what is the value of circumcision?
ROM 3:2 Actually, there are many advantages. First of all, the Jews were entrusted with the oracles of God.
ROM 3:3 What then? If some did not believe, does their unbelief nullify the faithfulness of God?
ROM 3:4 Absolutely not! Let God be proven true, and every human being shown up as a liar, just as it is written: “ so that you will be justified in your words and will prevail when you are judged.”
ROM 3:5 But if our unrighteousness demonstrates the righteousness of God, what shall we say? The God who inflicts wrath is not unrighteous, is he? (I am speaking in human terms.)
ROM 3:6 Absolutely not! For otherwise how could God judge the world?
ROM 3:7 For if by my lie the truth of God enhances his glory, why am I still actually being judged as a sinner?
ROM 3:8 And why not say, “Let us do evil so that good may come of it”? – as some who slander us allege that we say. (Their condemnation is deserved!)
ROM 3:9 What then? Are we better off? Certainly not, for we have already charged that Jews and Greeks alike are all under sin,
ROM 3:10 just as it is written: “ There is no one righteous, not even one,
ROM 3:11 there is no one who understands, there is no one who seeks God.
ROM 3:12 All have turned away, together they have become worthless; there is no one who shows kindness, not even one.”
ROM 3:13 “ Their throats are open graves, they deceive with their tongues, the poison of asps is under their lips.”
ROM 3:14 “ Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness.”
ROM 3:15 “ Their feet are swift to shed blood,
ROM 3:16 ruin and misery are in their paths,
ROM 3:17 and the way of peace they have not known.”
ROM 3:18 “ There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
ROM 3:19 Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world may be held accountable to God.
ROM 3:20 For no one is declared righteous before him by the works of the law, for through the law comes the knowledge of sin.
ROM 3:21 But now apart from the law the righteousness of God (which is attested by the law and the prophets) has been disclosed –
ROM 3:22 namely, the righteousness of God through the faithfulness of Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no distinction,
ROM 3:23 for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.
ROM 3:24 But they are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
ROM 3:25 God publicly displayed him at his death as the mercy seat accessible through faith. This was to demonstrate his righteousness, because God in his forbearance had passed over the sins previously committed.
ROM 3:26 This was also to demonstrate his righteousness in the present time, so that he would be just and the justifier of the one who lives because of Jesus’ faithfulness.
ROM 3:27 Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded! By what principle? Of works? No, but by the principle of faith!
ROM 3:28 For we consider that a person is declared righteous by faith apart from the works of the law.
ROM 3:29 Or is God the God of the Jews only? Is he not the God of the Gentiles too? Yes, of the Gentiles too!
ROM 3:30 Since God is one, he will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith.
ROM 3:31 Do we then nullify the law through faith? Absolutely not! Instead we uphold the law.
ROM 4:1 What then shall we say that Abraham, our ancestor according to the flesh, has discovered regarding this matter?
ROM 4:2 For if Abraham was declared righteous by the works of the law, he has something to boast about – but not before God.
ROM 4:3 For what does the scripture say? “ Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness*.”
ROM 4:4 Now to the one who works, his pay is not credited due to grace but due to obligation.
ROM 4:5 But to the one who does not work, but believes in the one who declares the ungodly righteous, his faith is credited as righteousness.
ROM 4:6 So even David himself speaks regarding the blessedness of the man to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:
ROM 4:7 “ Blessed are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;
ROM 4:8 blessed is the one against whom the Lord will never count sin*.”
ROM 4:9 Is this blessedness then for the circumcision or also for the uncircumcision? For we say, “ faith was credited to Abraham as righteousness.”
ROM 4:10 How then was it credited to him? Was he circumcised at the time, or not? No, he was not circumcised but uncircumcised!
ROM 4:11 And he received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised, so that he would become the father of all those who believe but have never been circumcised, that they too could have righteousness credited to them.
ROM 4:12 And he is also the father of the circumcised, who are not only circumcised, but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham possessed when he was still uncircumcised.
ROM 4:13 For the promise to Abraham or to his descendants that he would inherit the world was not fulfilled through the law, but through the righteousness that comes by faith.
ROM 4:14 For if they become heirs by the law, faith is empty and the promise is nullified.
ROM 4:15 For the law brings wrath, because where there is no law there is no transgression either.
ROM 4:16 For this reason it is by faith so that it may be by grace, with the result that the promise may be certain to all the descendants – not only to those who are under the law, but also to those who have the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all
ROM 4:17 (as it is written, “ I have made you the father of many nations”). He is our father in the presence of God whom he believed – the God who makes the dead alive and summons the things that do not yet exist as though they already do.
ROM 4:18 Against hope Abraham believed in hope with the result that he became the father of many nations according to the pronouncement, “ so will your descendants be.”
ROM 4:19 Without being weak in faith, he considered his own body as dead (because he was about one hundred years old) and the deadness of Sarah’s womb.
ROM 4:20 He did not waver in unbelief about the promise of God but was strengthened in faith, giving glory to God.
ROM 4:21 He was fully convinced that what God promised he was also able to do.
ROM 4:22 So indeed it was credited to Abraham as righteousness.
ROM 4:23 But the statement it was credited to him was not written only for Abraham’s sake,
ROM 4:24 but also for our sake, to whom it will be credited, those who believe in the one who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead.
ROM 4:25 He was given over because of our transgressions and was raised for the sake of our justification.
ROM 5:1 Therefore, since we have been declared righteous by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
ROM 5:2 through whom we have also obtained access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and we rejoice in the hope of God’s glory.
ROM 5:3 Not only this, but we also rejoice in sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance,
ROM 5:4 and endurance, character, and character, hope.
ROM 5:5 And hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us.
ROM 5:6 For while we were still helpless, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.
ROM 5:7 (For rarely will anyone die for a righteous person, though for a good person perhaps someone might possibly dare to die.)
ROM 5:8 But God demonstrates his own love for us, in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
ROM 5:9 Much more then, because we have now been declared righteous by his blood, we will be saved through him from God’s wrath.
ROM 5:10 For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more, since we have been reconciled, will we be saved by his life?
ROM 5:11 Not only this, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received this reconciliation.
ROM 5:12 So then, just as sin entered the world through one man and death through sin, and so death spread to all people because all sinned –
ROM 5:13 for before the law was given, sin was in the world, but there is no accounting for sin when there is no law.
ROM 5:14 Yet death reigned from Adam until Moses even over those who did not sin in the same way that Adam (who is a type of the coming one) transgressed.
ROM 5:15 But the gracious gift is not like the transgression. For if the many died through the transgression of the one man, how much more did the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man Jesus Christ multiply to the many!
ROM 5:16 And the gift is not like the one who sinned. For judgment, resulting from the one transgression, led to condemnation, but the gracious gift from the many failures led to justification.
ROM 5:17 For if, by the transgression of the one man, death reigned through the one, how much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ!
ROM 5:18 Consequently, just as condemnation for all people came through one transgression, so too through the one righteous act came righteousness leading to life for all people.
ROM 5:19 For just as through the disobedience of the one man many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of one man many will be made righteous.
ROM 5:20 Now the law came in so that the transgression may increase, but where sin increased, grace multiplied all the more,
ROM 5:21 so that just as sin reigned in death, so also grace will reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
ROM 6:1 What shall we say then? Are we to remain in sin so that grace may increase?
ROM 6:2 Absolutely not! How can we who died to sin still live in it?
ROM 6:3 Or do you not know that as many as were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
ROM 6:4 Therefore we have been buried with him through baptism into death, in order that just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we too may live a new life.
ROM 6:5 For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will certainly also be united in the likeness of his resurrection.
ROM 6:6 We know that our old man was crucified with him so that the body of sin would no longer dominate us, so that we would no longer be enslaved to sin.
ROM 6:7 (For someone who has died has been freed from sin.)
ROM 6:8 Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
ROM 6:9 We know that since Christ has been raised from the dead, he is never going to die again; death no longer has mastery over him.
ROM 6:10 For the death he died, he died to sin once for all, but the life he lives, he lives to God.
ROM 6:11 So you too consider yourselves dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
ROM 6:12 Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its desires,
ROM 6:13 and do not present your members to sin as instruments to be used for unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those who are alive from the dead and your members to God as instruments to be used for righteousness.
ROM 6:14 For sin will have no mastery over you, because you are not under law but under grace.
ROM 6:15 What then? Shall we sin because we are not under law but under grace? Absolutely not!
ROM 6:16 Do you not know that if you present yourselves as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey, either of sin resulting in death, or obedience resulting in righteousness?
ROM 6:17 But thanks be to God that though you were slaves to sin, you obeyed from the heart that pattern of teaching you were entrusted to,
ROM 6:18 and having been freed from sin, you became enslaved to righteousness.
ROM 6:19 (I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh.) For just as you once presented your members as slaves to impurity and lawlessness leading to more lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to sanctification.
ROM 6:20 For when you were slaves of sin, you were free with regard to righteousness.
ROM 6:21 So what benefit did you then reap from those things that you are now ashamed of? For the end of those things is death.
ROM 6:22 But now, freed from sin and enslaved to God, you have your benefit leading to sanctification, and the end is eternal life.
ROM 6:23 For the payoff of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
ROM 7:1 Or do you not know, brothers and sisters (for I am speaking to those who know the law), that the law is lord over a person as long as he lives?
ROM 7:2 For a married woman is bound by law to her husband as long as he lives, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law of the marriage.
ROM 7:3 So then, if she is joined to another man while her husband is alive, she will be called an adulteress. But if her husband dies, she is free from that law, and if she is joined to another man, she is not an adulteress.
ROM 7:4 So, my brothers and sisters, you also died to the law through the body of Christ, so that you could be joined to another, to the one who was raised from the dead, to bear fruit to God.
ROM 7:5 For when we were in the flesh, the sinful desires, aroused by the law, were active in the members of our body to bear fruit for death.
ROM 7:6 But now we have been released from the law, because we have died to what controlled us, so that we may serve in the new life of the Spirit and not under the old written code.
ROM 7:7 What shall we say then? Is the law sin? Absolutely not! Certainly, I would not have known sin except through the law. For indeed I would not have known what it means to desire something belonging to someone else if the law had not said, “ Do not covet.”
ROM 7:8 But sin, seizing the opportunity through the commandment, produced in me all kinds of wrong desires. For apart from the law, sin is dead.
ROM 7:9 And I was once alive apart from the law, but with the coming of the commandment sin became alive
ROM 7:10 and I died. So I found that the very commandment that was intended to bring life brought death!
ROM 7:11 For sin, seizing the opportunity through the commandment, deceived me and through it I died.
ROM 7:12 So then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous, and good.
ROM 7:13 Did that which is good, then, become death to me? Absolutely not! But sin, so that it would be shown to be sin, produced death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin would become utterly sinful.
ROM 7:14 For we know that the law is spiritual – but I am unspiritual, sold into slavery to sin.
ROM 7:15 For I don’t understand what I am doing. For I do not do what I want – instead, I do what I hate.
ROM 7:16 But if I do what I don’t want, I agree that the law is good.
ROM 7:17 But now it is no longer me doing it, but sin that lives in me.
ROM 7:18 For I know that nothing good lives in me, that is, in my flesh. For I want to do the good, but I cannot do it.
ROM 7:19 For I do not do the good I want, but I do the very evil I do not want!
ROM 7:20 Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer me doing it but sin that lives in me.
ROM 7:21 So, I find the law that when I want to do good, evil is present with me.
ROM 7:22 For I delight in the law of God in my inner being.
ROM 7:23 But I see a different law in my members waging war against the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin that is in my members.
ROM 7:24 Wretched man that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death?
ROM 7:25 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself serve the law of God with my mind, but with my flesh I serve the law of sin.
ROM 8:1 There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.
ROM 8:2 For the law of the life-giving Spirit in Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and death.
ROM 8:3 For God achieved what the law could not do because it was weakened through the flesh. By sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and concerning sin, he condemned sin in the flesh,
ROM 8:4 so that the righteous requirement of the law may be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.
ROM 8:5 For those who live according to the flesh have their outlook shaped by the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit have their outlook shaped by the things of the Spirit.
ROM 8:6 For the outlook of the flesh is death, but the outlook of the Spirit is life and peace,
ROM 8:7 because the outlook of the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to the law of God, nor is it able to do so.
ROM 8:8 Those who are in the flesh cannot please God.
ROM 8:9 You, however, are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God lives in you. Now if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, this person does not belong to him.
ROM 8:10 But if Christ is in you, your body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is your life because of righteousness.
ROM 8:11 Moreover if the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead lives in you, the one who raised Christ from the dead will also make your mortal bodies alive through his Spirit who lives in you.
ROM 8:12 So then, brothers and sisters, we are under obligation, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh
ROM 8:13 (for if you live according to the flesh, you will die), but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body you will live.
ROM 8:14 For all who are led by the Spirit of God are the sons of God.
ROM 8:15 For you did not receive the spirit of slavery leading again to fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, “Abba, Father.”
ROM 8:16 The Spirit himself bears witness to our spirit that we are God’s children.
ROM 8:17 And if children, then heirs (namely, heirs of God and also fellow heirs with Christ) – if indeed we suffer with him so we may also be glorified with him.
ROM 8:18 For I consider that our present sufferings cannot even be compared to the glory that will be revealed to us.
ROM 8:19 For the creation eagerly waits for the revelation of the sons of God.
ROM 8:20 For the creation was subjected to futility – not willingly but because of God who subjected it – in hope
ROM 8:21 that the creation itself will also be set free from the bondage of decay into the glorious freedom of God’s children.
ROM 8:22 For we know that the whole creation groans and suffers together until now.
ROM 8:23 Not only this, but we ourselves also, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we eagerly await our adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
ROM 8:24 For in hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope, because who hopes for what he sees?
ROM 8:25 But if we hope for what we do not see, we eagerly wait for it with endurance.
ROM 8:26 In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness, for we do not know how we should pray, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with inexpressible groanings.
ROM 8:27 And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes on behalf of the saints according to God’s will.
ROM 8:28 And we know that all things work together for good for those who love God, who are called according to his purpose,
ROM 8:29 because those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that his Son would be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters.
ROM 8:30 And those he predestined, he also called; and those he called, he also justified; and those he justified, he also glorified.
ROM 8:31 What then shall we say about these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
ROM 8:32 Indeed, he who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all – how will he not also, along with him, freely give us all things?
ROM 8:33 Who will bring any charge against God’s elect? It is God who justifies.
ROM 8:34 Who is the one who will condemn? Christ is the one who died (and more than that, he was raised), who is at the right hand of God, and who also is interceding for us.
ROM 8:35 Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will trouble, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?
ROM 8:36 As it is written, “ For your sake we encounter death all day long; we were considered as sheep to be slaughtered.”
ROM 8:37 No, in all these things we have complete victory through him who loved us!
ROM 8:38 For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor heavenly rulers, nor things that are present, nor things to come, nor powers,
ROM 8:39 nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in creation will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
ROM 9:1 I am telling the truth in Christ (I am not lying!), for my conscience assures me in the Holy Spirit –
ROM 9:2 I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
ROM 9:3 For I could wish that I myself were accursed – cut off from Christ – for the sake of my people, my fellow countrymen,
ROM 9:4 who are Israelites. To them belong the adoption as sons, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the temple worship, and the promises.
ROM 9:5 To them belong the patriarchs, and from them, by human descent, came the Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever! Amen.
ROM 9:6 It is not as though the word of God had failed. For not all those who are descended from Israel are truly Israel,
ROM 9:7 nor are all the children Abraham’s true descendants; rather “ through Isaac will your descendants be counted.”
ROM 9:8 This means it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God; rather, the children of promise are counted as descendants.
ROM 9:9 For this is what the promise declared: “ About a year from now I will return and Sarah will have a son.”
ROM 9:10 Not only that, but when Rebekah had conceived children by one man, our ancestor Isaac –
ROM 9:11 even before they were born or had done anything good or bad (so that God’s purpose in election would stand, not by works but by his calling) –
ROM 9:12 it was said to her, “ The older will serve the younger,”
ROM 9:13 just as it is written: “ Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”
ROM 9:14 What shall we say then? Is there injustice with God? Absolutely not!
ROM 9:15 For he says to Moses: “ I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
ROM 9:16 So then, it does not depend on human desire or exertion, but on God who shows mercy.
ROM 9:17 For the scripture says to Pharaoh: “ For this very purpose I have raised you up, that I may demonstrate my power in you, and that my name may be proclaimed in all the earth.”
ROM 9:18 So then, God has mercy on whom he chooses to have mercy, and he hardens whom he chooses to harden.
ROM 9:19 You will say to me then, “Why does he still find fault? For who has ever resisted his will?”
ROM 9:20 But who indeed are you – a mere human being – to talk back to God? Does what is molded say to the molder, “Why have you made me like this?”
ROM 9:21 Has the potter no right to make from the same lump of clay one vessel for special use and another for ordinary use?
ROM 9:22 But what if God, willing to demonstrate his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience the objects of wrath prepared for destruction?
ROM 9:23 And what if he is willing to make known the wealth of his glory on the objects of mercy that he has prepared beforehand for glory –
ROM 9:24 even us, whom he has called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles?
ROM 9:25 As he also says in Hosea: “ I will call those who were not my people, ‘My people,’ and I will call her who was unloved, ‘My beloved.*’”
ROM 9:26 “ And in the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,*’ there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’”
ROM 9:27 And Isaiah cries out on behalf of Israel, “Though the number of the children of Israel are as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved,
ROM 9:28 for the Lord will execute his sentence on the earth completely and quickly.”
ROM 9:29 Just as Isaiah predicted, “ If the Lord of armies had not left us descendants,* we would have become like Sodom, and we would have resembled Gomorrah.”
ROM 9:30 What shall we say then? – that the Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness obtained it, that is, a righteousness that is by faith,
ROM 9:31 but Israel even though pursuing a law of righteousness did not attain it.
ROM 9:32 Why not? Because they pursued it not by faith but (as if it were possible) by works. They stumbled over the stumbling stone,
ROM 9:33 just as it is written, “ Look, I am laying in Zion a stone that will cause people to stumble and a rock that will make them fall, yet the one who believes in him will not be put to shame.”
ROM 10:1 Brothers and sisters, my heart’s desire and prayer to God on behalf of my fellow Israelites is for their salvation.
ROM 10:2 For I can testify that they are zealous for God, but their zeal is not in line with the truth.
ROM 10:3 For ignoring the righteousness that comes from God, and seeking instead to establish their own righteousness, they did not submit to God’s righteousness.
ROM 10:4 For Christ is the end of the law, with the result that there is righteousness for everyone who believes.
ROM 10:5 For Moses writes about the righteousness that is by the law: “ The one who does these things will live by them.”
ROM 10:6 But the righteousness that is by faith says: “ Do not say in your heart, ‘ Who will ascend into heaven?’” (that is, to bring Christ down)
ROM 10:7 or “ Who will descend into the abyss?” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
ROM 10:8 But what does it say? “ The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart” (that is, the word of faith that we preach),
ROM 10:9 because if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
ROM 10:10 For with the heart one believes and thus has righteousness and with the mouth one confesses and thus has salvation.
ROM 10:11 For the scripture says, “ Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame.”
ROM 10:12 For there is no distinction between the Jew and the Greek, for the same Lord is Lord of all, who richly blesses all who call on him.
ROM 10:13 For everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
ROM 10:14 How are they to call on one they have not believed in? And how are they to believe in one they have not heard of? And how are they to hear without someone preaching to them ?
ROM 10:15 And how are they to preach unless they are sent? As it is written, “ How timely is the arrival of those who proclaim the good news*.”
ROM 10:16 But not all have obeyed the good news, for Isaiah says, “ Lord, who has believed our report?”
ROM 10:17 Consequently faith comes from what is heard, and what is heard comes through the preached word of Christ.
ROM 10:18 But I ask, have they not heard? Yes, they have: Their voice has gone out to all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.
ROM 10:19 But again I ask, didn’t Israel understand? First Moses says, “ I will make you jealous by those who are not a nation; with a senseless nation I will provoke you to anger.”
ROM 10:20 And Isaiah is even bold enough to say, “ I was found by those who did not seek me; I became well known to those who did not ask for me.”
ROM 10:21 But about Israel he says, “ All day long I held out my hands to this disobedient and stubborn people!”
ROM 11:1 So I ask, God has not rejected his people, has he? Absolutely not! For I too am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
ROM 11:2 God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew! Do you not know what the scripture says about Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel?
ROM 11:3 “Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have demolished your altars; I alone am left and they are seeking my life!”
ROM 11:4 But what was the divine response to him? “ I have kept for myself seven thousand people who have not bent the knee to Baal*.”
ROM 11:5 So in the same way at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
ROM 11:6 And if it is by grace, it is no longer by works, otherwise grace would no longer be grace.
ROM 11:7 What then? Israel failed to obtain what it was diligently seeking, but the elect obtained it. The rest were hardened,
ROM 11:8 as it is written, “God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that would not see and ears that would not hear, to this very day.”
ROM 11:9 And David says, “Let their table become a snare and trap, a stumbling block and a retribution for them;
ROM 11:10 let their eyes be darkened so that they may not see, and make their backs bend continually.”
ROM 11:11 I ask then, they did not stumble into an irrevocable fall, did they? Absolutely not! But by their transgression salvation has come to the Gentiles, to make Israel jealous.
ROM 11:12 Now if their transgression means riches for the world and their defeat means riches for the Gentiles, how much more will their full restoration bring?
ROM 11:13 Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Seeing that I am an apostle to the Gentiles, I magnify my ministry,
ROM 11:14 if somehow I could provoke my people to jealousy and save some of them.
ROM 11:15 For if their rejection is the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance be but life from the dead?
ROM 11:16 If the first portion of the dough offered is holy, then the whole batch is holy, and if the root is holy, so too are the branches.
ROM 11:17 Now if some of the branches were broken off, and you, a wild olive shoot, were grafted in among them and participated in the richness of the olive root,
ROM 11:18 do not boast over the branches. But if you boast, remember that you do not support the root, but the root supports you.
ROM 11:19 Then you will say, “The branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in.”
ROM 11:20 Granted! They were broken off because of their unbelief, but you stand by faith. Do not be arrogant, but fear!
ROM 11:21 For if God did not spare the natural branches, perhaps he will not spare you.
ROM 11:22 Notice therefore the kindness and harshness of God – harshness toward those who have fallen, but God’s kindness toward you, provided you continue in his kindness; otherwise you also will be cut off.
ROM 11:23 And even they – if they do not continue in their unbelief – will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
ROM 11:24 For if you were cut off from what is by nature a wild olive tree, and grafted, contrary to nature, into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these natural branches be grafted back into their own olive tree?
ROM 11:25 For I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers and sisters, so that you may not be conceited: A partial hardening has happened to Israel until the full number of the Gentiles has come in.
ROM 11:26 And so all Israel will be saved, as it is written: “The Deliverer will come out of Zion; he will remove ungodliness from Jacob.
ROM 11:27 And this is my covenant with them, when I take away their sins.”
ROM 11:28 In regard to the gospel they are enemies for your sake, but in regard to election they are dearly loved for the sake of the fathers.
ROM 11:29 For the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable.
ROM 11:30 Just as you were formerly disobedient to God, but have now received mercy due to their disobedience,
ROM 11:31 so they too have now been disobedient in order that, by the mercy shown to you, they too may now receive mercy.
ROM 11:32 For God has consigned all people to disobedience so that he may show mercy to them all.
ROM 11:33 Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how fathomless his ways!
ROM 11:34 For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?
ROM 11:35 Or who has first given to God, that God needs to repay him?
ROM 11:36 For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be glory forever! Amen.
ROM 12:1 Therefore I exhort you, brothers and sisters, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a sacrifice – alive, holy, and pleasing to God – which is your reasonable service.
ROM 12:2 Do not be conformed to this present world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may test and approve what is the will of God – what is good and well-pleasing and perfect.
ROM 12:3 For by the grace given to me I say to every one of you not to think more highly of yourself than you ought to think, but to think with sober discernment, as God has distributed to each of you a measure of faith.
ROM 12:4 For just as in one body we have many members, and not all the members serve the same function,
ROM 12:5 so we who are many are one body in Christ, and individually we are members who belong to one another.
ROM 12:6 And we have different gifts according to the grace given to us. If the gift is prophecy, that individual must use it in proportion to his faith.
ROM 12:7 If it is service, he must serve; if it is teaching, he must teach;
ROM 12:8 if it is exhortation, he must exhort; if it is contributing, he must do so with sincerity; if it is leadership, he must do so with diligence; if it is showing mercy, he must do so with cheerfulness.
ROM 12:9 Love must be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is evil, cling to what is good.
ROM 12:10 Be devoted to one another with mutual love, showing eagerness in honoring one another.
ROM 12:11 Do not lag in zeal, be enthusiastic in spirit, serve the Lord.
ROM 12:12 Rejoice in hope, endure in suffering, persist in prayer.
ROM 12:13 Contribute to the needs of the saints, pursue hospitality.
ROM 12:14 Bless those who persecute you, bless and do not curse.
ROM 12:15 Rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who weep.
ROM 12:16 Live in harmony with one another; do not be haughty but associate with the lowly. Do not be conceited.
ROM 12:17 Do not repay anyone evil for evil; consider what is good before all people.
ROM 12:18 If possible, so far as it depends on you, live peaceably with all people.
ROM 12:19 Do not avenge yourselves, dear friends, but give place to God’s wrath, for it is written, “ Vengeance is mine, I will repay,” says the Lord.
ROM 12:20 Rather, if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him a drink; for in doing this you will be heaping burning coals on his head.
ROM 12:21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
ROM 13:1 Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except by God’s appointment, and the authorities that exist have been instituted by God.
ROM 13:2 So the person who resists such authority resists the ordinance of God, and those who resist will incur judgment
ROM 13:3 (for rulers cause no fear for good conduct but for bad). Do you desire not to fear authority? Do good and you will receive its commendation,
ROM 13:4 for it is God’s servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be in fear, for it does not bear the sword in vain. It is God’s servant to administer retribution on the wrongdoer.
ROM 13:5 Therefore it is necessary to be in subjection, not only because of the wrath of the authorities but also because of your conscience.
ROM 13:6 For this reason you also pay taxes, for the authorities are God’s servants devoted to governing.
ROM 13:7 Pay everyone what is owed: taxes to whom taxes are due, revenue to whom revenue is due, respect to whom respect is due, honor to whom honor is due.
ROM 13:8 Owe no one anything, except to love one another, for the one who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.
ROM 13:9 For the commandments, “ Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not covet,” (and if there is any other commandment) are summed up in this, “ Love your neighbor as yourself.”
ROM 13:10 Love does no wrong to a neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law.
ROM 13:11 And do this because we know the time, that it is already the hour for us to awake from sleep, for our salvation is now nearer than when we became believers.
ROM 13:12 The night has advanced toward dawn; the day is near. So then we must lay aside the works of darkness, and put on the weapons of light.
ROM 13:13 Let us live decently as in the daytime, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in discord and jealousy.
ROM 13:14 Instead, put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to arouse its desires.
ROM 14:1 Now receive the one who is weak in the faith, and do not have disputes over differing opinions.
ROM 14:2 One person believes in eating everything, but the weak person eats only vegetables.
ROM 14:3 The one who eats everything must not despise the one who does not, and the one who abstains must not judge the one who eats everything, for God has accepted him.
ROM 14:4 Who are you to pass judgment on another’s servant? Before his own master he stands or falls. And he will stand, for the Lord is able to make him stand.
ROM 14:5 One person regards one day holier than other days, and another regards them all alike. Each must be fully convinced in his own mind.
ROM 14:6 The one who observes the day does it for the Lord. The one who eats, eats for the Lord because he gives thanks to God, and the one who abstains from eating abstains for the Lord, and he gives thanks to God.
ROM 14:7 For none of us lives for himself and none dies for himself.
ROM 14:8 If we live, we live for the Lord; if we die, we die for the Lord. Therefore, whether we live or die, we are the Lord’s.
ROM 14:9 For this reason Christ died and returned to life, so that he may be the Lord of both the dead and the living.
ROM 14:10 But you who eat vegetables only – why do you judge your brother or sister? And you who eat everything – why do you despise your brother or sister? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God.
ROM 14:11 For it is written, “ As I live, says the Lord, every knee will bow to me, and every tongue will give praise to God.”
ROM 14:12 Therefore, each of us will give an account of himself to God.
ROM 14:13 Therefore we must not pass judgment on one another, but rather determine never to place an obstacle or a trap before a brother or sister.
ROM 14:14 I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that there is nothing unclean in itself; still, it is unclean to the one who considers it unclean.
ROM 14:15 For if your brother or sister is distressed because of what you eat, you are no longer walking in love. Do not destroy by your food someone for whom Christ died.
ROM 14:16 Therefore do not let what you consider good be spoken of as evil.
ROM 14:17 For the kingdom of God does not consist of food and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
ROM 14:18 For the one who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and approved by people.
ROM 14:19 So then, let us pursue what makes for peace and for building up one another.
ROM 14:20 Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. For although all things are clean, it is wrong to cause anyone to stumble by what you eat.
ROM 14:21 It is good not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything that causes your brother to stumble.
ROM 14:22 The faith you have, keep to yourself before God. Blessed is the one who does not judge himself by what he approves.
ROM 14:23 But the man who doubts is condemned if he eats, because he does not do so from faith, and whatever is not from faith is sin.
ROM 15:1 But we who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak, and not just please ourselves.
ROM 15:2 Let each of us please his neighbor for his good to build him up.
ROM 15:3 For even Christ did not please himself, but just as it is written, “ The insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.”
ROM 15:4 For everything that was written in former times was written for our instruction, so that through endurance and through encouragement of the scriptures we may have hope.
ROM 15:5 Now may the God of endurance and comfort give you unity with one another in accordance with Christ Jesus,
ROM 15:6 so that together you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM 15:7 Receive one another, then, just as Christ also received you, to God’s glory.
ROM 15:8 For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of the circumcised on behalf of God’s truth to confirm the promises made to the fathers,
ROM 15:9 and thus the Gentiles glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, “ Because of this I will confess you among the Gentiles, and I will sing praises to your name.”
ROM 15:10 And again it says: “ Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people.”
ROM 15:11 And again, “ Praise the Lord all you Gentiles, and let all the peoples praise him.”
ROM 15:12 And again Isaiah says, “ The root of Jesse will come, and the one who rises to rule over the Gentiles, in him will the Gentiles hope.”
ROM 15:13 Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you believe in him, so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
ROM 15:14 But I myself am fully convinced about you, my brothers and sisters, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able to instruct one another.
ROM 15:15 But I have written more boldly to you on some points so as to remind you, because of the grace given to me by God
ROM 15:16 to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles. I serve the gospel of God like a priest, so that the Gentiles may become an acceptable offering, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
ROM 15:17 So I boast in Christ Jesus about the things that pertain to God.
ROM 15:18 For I will not dare to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me in order to bring about the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and deed,
ROM 15:19 in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of God. So from Jerusalem even as far as Illyricum I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.
ROM 15:20 And in this way I desire to preach where Christ has not been named, so as not to build on another person’s foundation,
ROM 15:21 but as it is written: “ Those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
ROM 15:22 This is the reason I was often hindered from coming to you.
ROM 15:23 But now there is nothing more to keep me in these regions, and I have for many years desired to come to you
ROM 15:24 when I go to Spain. For I hope to visit you when I pass through and that you will help me on my journey there, after I have enjoyed your company for a while.
ROM 15:25 But now I go to Jerusalem to minister to the saints.
ROM 15:26 For Macedonia and Achaia are pleased to make some contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.
ROM 15:27 For they were pleased to do this, and indeed they are indebted to the Jerusalem saints. For if the Gentiles have shared in their spiritual things, they are obligated also to minister to them in material things.
ROM 15:28 Therefore after I have completed this and have safely delivered this bounty to them, I will set out for Spain by way of you,
ROM 15:29 and I know that when I come to you I will come in the fullness of Christ’s blessing.
ROM 15:30 Now I urge you, brothers and sisters, through our Lord Jesus Christ and through the love of the Spirit, to join fervently with me in prayer to God on my behalf.
ROM 15:31 Pray that I may be rescued from those who are disobedient in Judea and that my ministry in Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints,
ROM 15:32 so that by God’s will I may come to you with joy and be refreshed in your company.
ROM 15:33 Now may the God of peace be with all of you. Amen.
ROM 16:1 Now I commend to you our sister Phoebe, who is a servant of the church in Cenchrea,
ROM 16:2 so that you may welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the saints and provide her with whatever help she may need from you, for she has been a great help to many, including me.
ROM 16:3 Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
ROM 16:4 who risked their own necks for my life. Not only I, but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them.
ROM 16:5 Also greet the church in their house. Greet my dear friend Epenetus, who was the first convert to Christ in the province of Asia.
ROM 16:6 Greet Mary, who has worked very hard for you.
ROM 16:7 Greet Andronicus and Junia, my compatriots and my fellow prisoners. They are well known to the apostles, and they were in Christ before me.
ROM 16:8 Greet Ampliatus, my dear friend in the Lord.
ROM 16:9 Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my good friend Stachys.
ROM 16:10 Greet Apelles, who is approved in Christ. Greet those who belong to the household of Aristobulus.
ROM 16:11 Greet Herodion, my compatriot. Greet those in the household of Narcissus who are in the Lord.
ROM 16:12 Greet Tryphena and Tryphosa, laborers in the Lord. Greet my dear friend Persis, who has worked hard in the Lord.
ROM 16:13 Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother who was also a mother to me.
ROM 16:14 Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers and sisters with them.
ROM 16:15 Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the believers who are with them.
ROM 16:16 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you.
ROM 16:17 Now I urge you, brothers and sisters, to watch out for those who create dissensions and obstacles contrary to the teaching that you learned. Avoid them!
ROM 16:18 For these are the kind who do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own appetites. By their smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds of the naive.
ROM 16:19 Your obedience is known to all and thus I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise in what is good and innocent in what is evil.
ROM 16:20 The God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you.
ROM 16:21 Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you; so do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my compatriots.
ROM 16:22 I, Tertius, who am writing this letter, greet you in the Lord.
ROM 16:23 Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you. Erastus the city treasurer and our brother Quartus greet you.
ROM 16:24 
ROM 16:25 Now to him who is able to strengthen you according to my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery that had been kept secret for long ages,
ROM 16:26 but now is disclosed, and through the prophetic scriptures has been made known to all the nations, according to the command of the eternal God, to bring about the obedience of faith –
ROM 16:27 to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, be glory forever! Amen.
1CO 1:1 From Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Sosthenes, our brother,
1CO 1:2 to the church of God that is in Corinth, to those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to be saints, with all those in every place who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours.
1CO 1:3 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
1CO 1:4 I always thank my God for you because of the grace of God that was given to you in Christ Jesus.
1CO 1:5 For you were made rich in every way in him, in all your speech and in every kind of knowledge –
1CO 1:6 just as the testimony about Christ has been confirmed among you –
1CO 1:7 so that you do not lack any spiritual gift as you wait for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO 1:8 He will also strengthen you to the end, so that you will be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO 1:9 God is faithful, by whom you were called into fellowship with his son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
1CO 1:10 I urge you, brothers and sisters, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to agree together, to end your divisions, and to be united by the same mind and purpose.
1CO 1:11 For members of Chloe’s household have made it clear to me, my brothers and sisters, that there are quarrels among you.
1CO 1:12 Now I mean this, that each of you is saying, “I am with Paul,” or “I am with Apollos,” or “I am with Cephas,” or “I am with Christ.”
1CO 1:13 Is Christ divided? Paul wasn’t crucified for you, was he? Or were you in fact baptized in the name of Paul?
1CO 1:14 I thank God that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius,
1CO 1:15 so that no one can say that you were baptized in my name!
1CO 1:16 (I also baptized the household of Stephanus. Otherwise, I do not remember whether I baptized anyone else.)
1CO 1:17 For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel – and not with clever speech, so that the cross of Christ would not become useless.
1CO 1:18 For the message about the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.
1CO 1:19 For it is written, “ I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and I will thwart the cleverness of the intelligent.”
1CO 1:20 Where is the wise man? Where is the expert in the Mosaic law? Where is the debater of this age? Has God not made the wisdom of the world foolish?
1CO 1:21 For since in the wisdom of God the world by its wisdom did not know God, God was pleased to save those who believe by the foolishness of preaching.
1CO 1:22 For Jews demand miraculous signs and Greeks ask for wisdom,
1CO 1:23 but we preach about a crucified Christ, a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles.
1CO 1:24 But to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
1CO 1:25 For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength.
1CO 1:26 Think about the circumstances of your call, brothers and sisters. Not many were wise by human standards, not many were powerful, not many were born to a privileged position.
1CO 1:27 But God chose what the world thinks foolish to shame the wise, and God chose what the world thinks weak to shame the strong.
1CO 1:28 God chose what is low and despised in the world, what is regarded as nothing, to set aside what is regarded as something,
1CO 1:29 so that no one can boast in his presence.
1CO 1:30 He is the reason you have a relationship with Christ Jesus, who became for us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification and redemption,
1CO 1:31 so that, as it is written, “ Let the one who boasts, boast in the Lord.”
1CO 2:1 When I came to you, brothers and sisters, I did not come with superior eloquence or wisdom as I proclaimed the testimony of God.
1CO 2:2 For I decided to be concerned about nothing among you except Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
1CO 2:3 And I was with you in weakness and in fear and with much trembling.
1CO 2:4 My conversation and my preaching were not with persuasive words of wisdom, but with a demonstration of the Spirit and of power,
1CO 2:5 so that your faith would not be based on human wisdom but on the power of God.
1CO 2:6 Now we do speak wisdom among the mature, but not a wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are perishing.
1CO 2:7 Instead we speak the wisdom of God, hidden in a mystery, that God determined before the ages for our glory.
1CO 2:8 None of the rulers of this age understood it. If they had known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
1CO 2:9 But just as it is written, “ Things that no eye has seen, or ear heard, or mind imagined, are the things God has prepared for those who love him.”
1CO 2:10 God has revealed these to us by the Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.
1CO 2:11 For who among men knows the things of a man except the man’s spirit within him? So too, no one knows the things of God except the Spirit of God.
1CO 2:12 Now we have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, so that we may know the things that are freely given to us by God.
1CO 2:13 And we speak about these things, not with words taught us by human wisdom, but with those taught by the Spirit, explaining spiritual things to spiritual people.
1CO 2:14 The unbeliever does not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him. And he cannot understand them, because they are spiritually discerned.
1CO 2:15 The one who is spiritual discerns all things, yet he himself is understood by no one.
1CO 2:16 For who has known the mind of the Lord, so as to advise him? But we have the mind of Christ.
1CO 3:1 So, brothers and sisters, I could not speak to you as spiritual people, but instead as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ.
1CO 3:2 I fed you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready. In fact, you are still not ready,
1CO 3:3 for you are still influenced by the flesh. For since there is still jealousy and dissension among you, are you not influenced by the flesh and behaving like unregenerate people?
1CO 3:4 For whenever someone says, “I am with Paul,” or “I am with Apollos,” are you not merely human?
1CO 3:5 What is Apollos, really? Or what is Paul? Servants through whom you came to believe, and each of us in the ministry the Lord gave us.
1CO 3:6 I planted, Apollos watered, but God caused it to grow.
1CO 3:7 So neither the one who plants counts for anything, nor the one who waters, but God who causes the growth.
1CO 3:8 The one who plants and the one who waters work as one, but each will receive his reward according to his work.
1CO 3:9 We are coworkers belonging to God. You are God’s field, God’s building.
1CO 3:10 According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master-builder I laid a foundation, but someone else builds on it. And each one must be careful how he builds.
1CO 3:11 For no one can lay any foundation other than what is being laid, which is Jesus Christ.
1CO 3:12 If anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
1CO 3:13 each builder’s work will be plainly seen, for the Day will make it clear, because it will be revealed by fire. And the fire will test what kind of work each has done.
1CO 3:14 If what someone has built survives, he will receive a reward.
1CO 3:15 If someone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss. He himself will be saved, but only as through fire.
1CO 3:16 Do you not know that you are God’s temple and that God’s Spirit lives in you?
1CO 3:17 If someone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy him. For God’s temple is holy, which is what you are.
1CO 3:18 Guard against self-deception, each of you. If someone among you thinks he is wise in this age, let him become foolish so that he can become wise.
1CO 3:19 For the wisdom of this age is foolishness with God. As it is written, “ He catches the wise in their craftiness.”
1CO 3:20 And again, “ The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise are futile.”
1CO 3:21 So then, no more boasting about mere mortals! For everything belongs to you,
1CO 3:22 whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future. Everything belongs to you,
1CO 3:23 and you belong to Christ, and Christ belongs to God.
1CO 4:1 One should think about us this way – as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God.
1CO 4:2 Now what is sought in stewards is that one be found faithful.
1CO 4:3 So for me, it is a minor matter that I am judged by you or by any human court. In fact, I do not even judge myself.
1CO 4:4 For I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not acquitted because of this. The one who judges me is the Lord.
1CO 4:5 So then, do not judge anything before the time. Wait until the Lord comes. He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and reveal the motives of hearts. Then each will receive recognition from God.
1CO 4:6 I have applied these things to myself and Apollos because of you, brothers and sisters, so that through us you may learn “not to go beyond what is written,” so that none of you will be puffed up in favor of the one against the other.
1CO 4:7 For who concedes you any superiority? What do you have that you did not receive? And if you received it, why do you boast as though you did not?
1CO 4:8 Already you are satisfied! Already you are rich! You have become kings without us! I wish you had become kings so that we could reign with you!
1CO 4:9 For, I think, God has exhibited us apostles last of all, as men condemned to die, because we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and to people.
1CO 4:10 We are fools for Christ, but you are wise in Christ! We are weak, but you are strong! You are distinguished, we are dishonored!
1CO 4:11 To the present hour we are hungry and thirsty, poorly clothed, brutally treated, and without a roof over our heads.
1CO 4:12 We do hard work, toiling with our own hands. When we are verbally abused, we respond with a blessing, when persecuted, we endure,
1CO 4:13 when people lie about us, we answer in a friendly manner. We are the world’s dirt and scum, even now.
1CO 4:14 I am not writing these things to shame you, but to correct you as my dear children.
1CO 4:15 For though you may have ten thousand guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers, because I became your father in Christ Jesus through the gospel.
1CO 4:16 I encourage you, then, be imitators of me.
1CO 4:17 For this reason, I have sent Timothy to you, who is my dear and faithful son in the Lord. He will remind you of my ways in Christ, as I teach them everywhere in every church.
1CO 4:18 Some have become arrogant, as if I were not coming to you.
1CO 4:19 But I will come to you soon, if the Lord is willing, and I will find out not only the talk of these arrogant people, but also their power.
1CO 4:20 For the kingdom of God is demonstrated not in idle talk but with power.
1CO 4:21 What do you want? Shall I come to you with a rod of discipline or with love and a spirit of gentleness?
1CO 5:1 It is actually reported that sexual immorality exists among you, the kind of immorality that is not permitted even among the Gentiles, so that someone is cohabiting with his father’s wife.
1CO 5:2 And you are proud! Shouldn’t you have been deeply sorrowful instead and removed the one who did this from among you?
1CO 5:3 For even though I am absent physically, I am present in spirit. And I have already judged the one who did this, just as though I were present.
1CO 5:4 When you gather together in the name of our Lord Jesus, and I am with you in spirit, along with the power of our Lord Jesus,
1CO 5:5 turn this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
1CO 5:6 Your boasting is not good. Don’t you know that a little yeast affects the whole batch of dough?
1CO 5:7 Clean out the old yeast so that you may be a new batch of dough – you are, in fact, without yeast. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed.
1CO 5:8 So then, let us celebrate the festival, not with the old yeast, the yeast of vice and evil, but with the bread without yeast, the bread of sincerity and truth.
1CO 5:9 I wrote you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people.
1CO 5:10 In no way did I mean the immoral people of this world, or the greedy and swindlers and idolaters, since you would then have to go out of the world.
1CO 5:11 But now I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who calls himself a Christian who is sexually immoral, or greedy, or an idolater, or verbally abusive, or a drunkard, or a swindler. Do not even eat with such a person.
1CO 5:12 For what do I have to do with judging those outside? Are you not to judge those inside?
1CO 5:13 But God will judge those outside. Remove the evil person from among you.
1CO 6:1 When any of you has a legal dispute with another, does he dare go to court before the unrighteous rather than before the saints?
1CO 6:2 Or do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you not competent to settle trivial suits?
1CO 6:3 Do you not know that we will judge angels? Why not ordinary matters!
1CO 6:4 So if you have ordinary lawsuits, do you appoint as judges those who have no standing in the church?
1CO 6:5 I say this to your shame! Is there no one among you wise enough to settle disputes between fellow Christians?
1CO 6:6 Instead, does a Christian sue a Christian, and do this before unbelievers?
1CO 6:7 The fact that you have lawsuits among yourselves demonstrates that you have already been defeated. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be cheated?
1CO 6:8 But you yourselves wrong and cheat, and you do this to your brothers and sisters!
1CO 6:9 Do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived! The sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, passive homosexual partners, practicing homosexuals,
1CO 6:10 thieves, the greedy, drunkards, the verbally abusive, and swindlers will not inherit the kingdom of God.
1CO 6:11 Some of you once lived this way. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.
1CO 6:12 “All things are lawful for me” – but not everything is beneficial. “All things are lawful for me” – but I will not be controlled by anything.
1CO 6:13 “Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food, but God will do away with both.” The body is not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
1CO 6:14 Now God indeed raised the Lord and he will raise us by his power.
1CO 6:15 Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Should I take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? Never!
1CO 6:16 Or do you not know that anyone who is united with a prostitute is one body with her? For it is said, “ The two will become one flesh.”
1CO 6:17 But the one united with the Lord is one spirit with him.
1CO 6:18 Flee sexual immorality! “Every sin a person commits is outside of the body” – but the immoral person sins against his own body.
1CO 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own?
1CO 6:20 For you were bought at a price. Therefore glorify God with your body.
1CO 7:1 Now with regard to the issues you wrote about: “It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman.”
1CO 7:2 But because of immoralities, each man should have relations with his own wife and each woman with her own husband.
1CO 7:3 A husband should give to his wife her sexual rights, and likewise a wife to her husband.
1CO 7:4 It is not the wife who has the rights to her own body, but the husband. In the same way, it is not the husband who has the rights to his own body, but the wife.
1CO 7:5 Do not deprive each other, except by mutual agreement for a specified time, so that you may devote yourselves to prayer. Then resume your relationship, so that Satan may not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
1CO 7:6 I say this as a concession, not as a command.
1CO 7:7 I wish that everyone was as I am. But each has his own gift from God, one this way, another that.
1CO 7:8 To the unmarried and widows I say that it is best for them to remain as I am.
1CO 7:9 But if they do not have self-control, let them get married. For it is better to marry than to burn with sexual desire.
1CO 7:10 To the married I give this command – not I, but the Lord – a wife should not divorce a husband
1CO 7:11 (but if she does, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband), and a husband should not divorce his wife.
1CO 7:12 To the rest I say – I, not the Lord – if a brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is happy to live with him, he should not divorce her.
1CO 7:13 And if a woman has a husband who is not a believer and he is happy to live with her, she should not divorce him.
1CO 7:14 For the unbelieving husband is sanctified because of the wife, and the unbelieving wife because of her husband. Otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy.
1CO 7:15 But if the unbeliever wants a divorce, let it take place. In these circumstances the brother or sister is not bound. God has called you in peace.
1CO 7:16 For how do you know, wife, whether you will bring your husband to salvation? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will bring your wife to salvation?
1CO 7:17 Nevertheless, as the Lord has assigned to each one, as God has called each person, so must he live. I give this sort of direction in all the churches.
1CO 7:18 Was anyone called after he had been circumcised? He should not try to undo his circumcision. Was anyone called who is uncircumcised? He should not get circumcised.
1CO 7:19 Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing. Instead, keeping God’s commandments is what counts.
1CO 7:20 Let each one remain in that situation in life in which he was called.
1CO 7:21 Were you called as a slave? Do not worry about it. But if indeed you are able to be free, make the most of the opportunity.
1CO 7:22 For the one who was called in the Lord as a slave is the Lord’s freedman. In the same way, the one who was called as a free person is Christ’s slave.
1CO 7:23 You were bought with a price. Do not become slaves of men.
1CO 7:24 In whatever situation someone was called, brothers and sisters, let him remain in it with God.
1CO 7:25 With regard to the question about people who have never married, I have no command from the Lord, but I give my opinion as one shown mercy by the Lord to be trustworthy.
1CO 7:26 Because of the impending crisis I think it best for you to remain as you are.
1CO 7:27 The one bound to a wife should not seek divorce. The one released from a wife should not seek marriage.
1CO 7:28 But if you marry, you have not sinned. And if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. But those who marry will face difficult circumstances, and I am trying to spare you such problems.
1CO 7:29 And I say this, brothers and sisters: The time is short. So then those who have wives should be as those who have none,
1CO 7:30 those with tears like those not weeping, those who rejoice like those not rejoicing, those who buy like those without possessions,
1CO 7:31 those who use the world as though they were not using it to the full. For the present shape of this world is passing away.
1CO 7:32 And I want you to be free from concern. An unmarried man is concerned about the things of the Lord, how to please the Lord.
1CO 7:33 But a married man is concerned about the things of the world, how to please his wife,
1CO 7:34 and he is divided. An unmarried woman or a virgin is concerned about the things of the Lord, to be holy both in body and spirit. But a married woman is concerned about the things of the world, how to please her husband.
1CO 7:35 I am saying this for your benefit, not to place a limitation on you, but so that without distraction you may give notable and constant service to the Lord.
1CO 7:36 If anyone thinks he is acting inappropriately toward his virgin, if she is past the bloom of youth and it seems necessary, he should do what he wishes; he does not sin. Let them marry.
1CO 7:37 But the man who is firm in his commitment, and is under no necessity but has control over his will, and has decided in his own mind to keep his own virgin, does well.
1CO 7:38 So then, the one who marries his own virgin does well, but the one who does not, does better.
1CO 7:39 A wife is bound as long as her husband is living. But if her husband dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes (only someone in the Lord).
1CO 7:40 But in my opinion, she will be happier if she remains as she is – and I think that I too have the Spirit of God!
1CO 8:1 With regard to food sacrificed to idols, we know that “we all have knowledge.” Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
1CO 8:2 If someone thinks he knows something, he does not yet know to the degree that he needs to know.
1CO 8:3 But if someone loves God, he is known by God.
1CO 8:4 With regard then to eating food sacrificed to idols, we know that “an idol in this world is nothing,” and that “there is no God but one.”
1CO 8:5 If after all there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as there are many gods and many lords),
1CO 8:6 yet for us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we live, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we live.
1CO 8:7 But this knowledge is not shared by all. And some, by being accustomed to idols in former times, eat this food as an idol sacrifice, and their conscience, because it is weak, is defiled.
1CO 8:8 Now food will not bring us close to God. We are no worse if we do not eat and no better if we do.
1CO 8:9 But be careful that this liberty of yours does not become a hindrance to the weak.
1CO 8:10 For if someone weak sees you who possess knowledge dining in an idol’s temple, will not his conscience be “strengthened” to eat food offered to idols?
1CO 8:11 So by your knowledge the weak brother or sister, for whom Christ died, is destroyed.
1CO 8:12 If you sin against your brothers or sisters in this way and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ.
1CO 8:13 For this reason, if food causes my brother or sister to sin, I will never eat meat again, so that I may not cause one of them to sin.
1CO 9:1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
1CO 9:2 If I am not an apostle to others, at least I am to you, for you are the confirming sign of my apostleship in the Lord.
1CO 9:3 This is my defense to those who examine me.
1CO 9:4 Do we not have the right to financial support?
1CO 9:5 Do we not have the right to the company of a believing wife, like the other apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas?
1CO 9:6 Or do only Barnabas and I lack the right not to work?
1CO 9:7 Who ever serves in the army at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat its fruit? Who tends a flock and does not consume its milk?
1CO 9:8 Am I saying these things only on the basis of common sense, or does the law not say this as well?
1CO 9:9 For it is written in the law of Moses, “ Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” God is not concerned here about oxen, is he?
1CO 9:10 Or is he not surely speaking for our benefit? It was written for us, because the one plowing and threshing ought to work in hope of enjoying the harvest.
1CO 9:11 If we sowed spiritual blessings among you, is it too much to reap material things from you?
1CO 9:12 If others receive this right from you, are we not more deserving? But we have not made use of this right. Instead we endure everything so that we may not be a hindrance to the gospel of Christ.
1CO 9:13 Don’t you know that those who serve in the temple eat food from the temple, and those who serve at the altar receive a part of the offerings?
1CO 9:14 In the same way the Lord commanded those who proclaim the gospel to receive their living by the gospel.
1CO 9:15 But I have not used any of these rights. And I am not writing these things so that something will be done for me. In fact, it would be better for me to die than – no one will deprive me of my reason for boasting!
1CO 9:16 For if I preach the gospel, I have no reason for boasting, because I am compelled to do this. Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel!
1CO 9:17 For if I do this voluntarily, I have a reward. But if I do it unwillingly, I am entrusted with a responsibility.
1CO 9:18 What then is my reward? That when I preach the gospel I may offer the gospel free of charge, and so not make full use of my rights in the gospel.
1CO 9:19 For since I am free from all I can make myself a slave to all, in order to gain even more people.
1CO 9:20 To the Jews I became like a Jew to gain the Jews. To those under the law I became like one under the law (though I myself am not under the law) to gain those under the law.
1CO 9:21 To those free from the law I became like one free from the law (though I am not free from God’s law but under the law of Christ) to gain those free from the law.
1CO 9:22 To the weak I became weak in order to gain the weak. I have become all things to all people, so that by all means I may save some.
1CO 9:23 I do all these things because of the gospel, so that I can be a participant in it.
1CO 9:24 Do you not know that all the runners in a stadium compete, but only one receives the prize? So run to win.
1CO 9:25 Each competitor must exercise self-control in everything. They do it to receive a perishable crown, but we an imperishable one.
1CO 9:26 So I do not run uncertainly or box like one who hits only air.
1CO 9:27 Instead I subdue my body and make it my slave, so that after preaching to others I myself will not be disqualified.
1CO 10:1 For I do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that our fathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea,
1CO 10:2 and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea,
1CO 10:3 and all ate the same spiritual food,
1CO 10:4 and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they were all drinking from the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.
1CO 10:5 But God was not pleased with most of them, for they were cut down in the wilderness.
1CO 10:6 These things happened as examples for us, so that we will not crave evil things as they did.
1CO 10:7 So do not be idolaters, as some of them were. As it is written, “ The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play.”
1CO 10:8 And let us not be immoral, as some of them were, and twenty-three thousand died in a single day.
1CO 10:9 And let us not put Christ to the test, as some of them did, and were destroyed by snakes.
1CO 10:10 And do not complain, as some of them did, and were killed by the destroying angel.
1CO 10:11 These things happened to them as examples and were written for our instruction, on whom the ends of the ages have come.
1CO 10:12 So let the one who thinks he is standing be careful that he does not fall.
1CO 10:13 No trial has overtaken you that is not faced by others. And God is faithful: He will not let you be tried beyond what you are able to bear, but with the trial will also provide a way out so that you may be able to endure it.
1CO 10:14 So then, my dear friends, flee from idolatry.
1CO 10:15 I am speaking to thoughtful people. Consider what I say.
1CO 10:16 Is not the cup of blessing that we bless a sharing in the blood of Christ? Is not the bread that we break a sharing in the body of Christ?
1CO 10:17 Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all share the one bread.
1CO 10:18 Look at the people of Israel. Are not those who eat the sacrifices partners in the altar?
1CO 10:19 Am I saying that idols or food sacrificed to them amount to anything?
1CO 10:20 No, I mean that what the pagans sacrifice is to demons and not to God. I do not want you to be partners with demons.
1CO 10:21 You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot take part in the table of the Lord and the table of demons.
1CO 10:22 Or are we trying to provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we really stronger than he is?
1CO 10:23 “Everything is lawful,” but not everything is beneficial. “Everything is lawful,” but not everything builds others up.
1CO 10:24 Do not seek your own good, but the good of the other person.
1CO 10:25 Eat anything that is sold in the marketplace without questions of conscience,
1CO 10:26 for the earth and its abundance are the Lord’s.
1CO 10:27 If an unbeliever invites you to dinner and you want to go, eat whatever is served without asking questions of conscience.
1CO 10:28 But if someone says to you, “This is from a sacrifice,” do not eat, because of the one who told you and because of conscience –
1CO 10:29 I do not mean yours but the other person’s. For why is my freedom being judged by another’s conscience?
1CO 10:30 If I partake with thankfulness, why am I blamed for the food that I give thanks for?
1CO 10:31 So whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do everything for the glory of God.
1CO 10:32 Do not give offense to Jews or Greeks or to the church of God,
1CO 10:33 just as I also try to please everyone in all things. I do not seek my own benefit, but the benefit of many, so that they may be saved.
1CO 11:1 Be imitators of me, just as I also am of Christ.
1CO 11:2 I praise you because you remember me in everything and maintain the traditions just as I passed them on to you.
1CO 11:3 But I want you to know that Christ is the head of every man, and the man is the head of a woman, and God is the head of Christ.
1CO 11:4 Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered disgraces his head.
1CO 11:5 But any woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered disgraces her head, for it is one and the same thing as having a shaved head.
1CO 11:6 For if a woman will not cover her head, she should cut off her hair. But if it is disgraceful for a woman to have her hair cut off or her head shaved, she should cover her head.
1CO 11:7 For a man should not have his head covered, since he is the image and glory of God. But the woman is the glory of the man.
1CO 11:8 For man did not come from woman, but woman from man.
1CO 11:9 Neither was man created for the sake of woman, but woman for man.
1CO 11:10 For this reason a woman should have a symbol of authority on her head, because of the angels.
1CO 11:11 In any case, in the Lord woman is not independent of man, nor is man independent of woman.
1CO 11:12 For just as woman came from man, so man comes through woman. But all things come from God.
1CO 11:13 Judge for yourselves: Is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
1CO 11:14 Does not nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a disgrace for him,
1CO 11:15 but if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? For her hair is given to her for a covering.
1CO 11:16 If anyone intends to quarrel about this, we have no other practice, nor do the churches of God.
1CO 11:17 Now in giving the following instruction I do not praise you, because you come together not for the better but for the worse.
1CO 11:18 For in the first place, when you come together as a church I hear there are divisions among you, and in part I believe it.
1CO 11:19 For there must in fact be divisions among you, so that those of you who are approved may be evident.
1CO 11:20 Now when you come together at the same place, you are not really eating the Lord’s Supper.
1CO 11:21 For when it is time to eat, everyone proceeds with his own supper. One is hungry and another becomes drunk.
1CO 11:22 Do you not have houses so that you can eat and drink? Or are you trying to show contempt for the church of God by shaming those who have nothing? What should I say to you? Should I praise you? I will not praise you for this!
1CO 11:23 For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed took bread,
1CO 11:24 and after he had given thanks he broke it and said, “This is my body, which is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.”
1CO 11:25 In the same way, he also took the cup after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, every time you drink it, in remembrance of me.”
1CO 11:26 For every time you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until he comes.
1CO 11:27 For this reason, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
1CO 11:28 A person should examine himself first, and in this way let him eat the bread and drink of the cup.
1CO 11:29 For the one who eats and drinks without careful regard for the body eats and drinks judgment against himself.
1CO 11:30 That is why many of you are weak and sick, and quite a few are dead.
1CO 11:31 But if we examined ourselves, we would not be judged.
1CO 11:32 But when we are judged by the Lord, we are disciplined so that we may not be condemned with the world.
1CO 11:33 So then, my brothers and sisters, when you come together to eat, wait for one another.
1CO 11:34 If anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, so that when you assemble it does not lead to judgment. I will give directions about other matters when I come.
1CO 12:1 With regard to spiritual gifts, brothers and sisters, I do not want you to be uninformed.
1CO 12:2 You know that when you were pagans you were often led astray by speechless idols, however you were led.
1CO 12:3 So I want you to understand that no one speaking by the Spirit of God says, “Jesus is cursed,” and no one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit.
1CO 12:4 Now there are different gifts, but the same Spirit.
1CO 12:5 And there are different ministries, but the same Lord.
1CO 12:6 And there are different results, but the same God who produces all of them in everyone.
1CO 12:7 To each person the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the benefit of all.
1CO 12:8 For one person is given through the Spirit the message of wisdom, and another the message of knowledge according to the same Spirit,
1CO 12:9 to another faith by the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit,
1CO 12:10 to another performance of miracles, to another prophecy, and to another discernment of spirits, to another different kinds of tongues, and to another the interpretation of tongues.
1CO 12:11 It is one and the same Spirit, distributing as he decides to each person, who produces all these things.
1CO 12:12 For just as the body is one and yet has many members, and all the members of the body – though many – are one body, so too is Christ.
1CO 12:13 For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body. Whether Jews or Greeks or slaves or free, we were all made to drink of the one Spirit.
1CO 12:14 For in fact the body is not a single member, but many.
1CO 12:15 If the foot says, “Since I am not a hand, I am not part of the body,” it does not lose its membership in the body because of that.
1CO 12:16 And if the ear says, “Since I am not an eye, I am not part of the body,” it does not lose its membership in the body because of that.
1CO 12:17 If the whole body were an eye, what part would do the hearing? If the whole were an ear, what part would exercise the sense of smell?
1CO 12:18 But as a matter of fact, God has placed each of the members in the body just as he decided.
1CO 12:19 If they were all the same member, where would the body be?
1CO 12:20 So now there are many members, but one body.
1CO 12:21 The eye cannot say to the hand, “I do not need you,” nor in turn can the head say to the foot, “I do not need you.”
1CO 12:22 On the contrary, those members that seem to be weaker are essential,
1CO 12:23 and those members we consider less honorable we clothe with greater honor, and our unpresentable members are clothed with dignity,
1CO 12:24 but our presentable members do not need this. Instead, God has blended together the body, giving greater honor to the lesser member,
1CO 12:25 so that there may be no division in the body, but the members may have mutual concern for one another.
1CO 12:26 If one member suffers, everyone suffers with it. If a member is honored, all rejoice with it.
1CO 12:27 Now you are Christ’s body, and each of you is a member of it.
1CO 12:28 And God has placed in the church first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracles, gifts of healing, helps, gifts of leadership, different kinds of tongues.
1CO 12:29 Not all are apostles, are they? Not all are prophets, are they? Not all are teachers, are they? Not all perform miracles, do they?
1CO 12:30 Not all have gifts of healing, do they? Not all speak in tongues, do they? Not all interpret, do they?
1CO 12:31 But you should be eager for the greater gifts. And now I will show you a way that is beyond comparison.
1CO 13:1 If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but I do not have love, I am a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal.
1CO 13:2 And if I have prophecy, and know all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so that I can remove mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
1CO 13:3 If I give away everything I own, and if I give over my body in order to boast, but do not have love, I receive no benefit.
1CO 13:4 Love is patient, love is kind, it is not envious. Love does not brag, it is not puffed up.
1CO 13:5 It is not rude, it is not self-serving, it is not easily angered or resentful.
1CO 13:6 It is not glad about injustice, but rejoices in the truth.
1CO 13:7 It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
1CO 13:8 Love never ends. But if there are prophecies, they will be set aside; if there are tongues, they will cease; if there is knowledge, it will be set aside.
1CO 13:9 For we know in part, and we prophesy in part,
1CO 13:10 but when what is perfect comes, the partial will be set aside.
1CO 13:11 When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. But when I became an adult, I set aside childish ways.
1CO 13:12 For now we see in a mirror indirectly, but then we will see face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, just as I have been fully known.
1CO 13:13 And now these three remain: faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love.
1CO 14:1 Pursue love and be eager for the spiritual gifts, especially that you may prophesy.
1CO 14:2 For the one speaking in a tongue does not speak to people but to God, for no one understands; he is speaking mysteries by the Spirit.
1CO 14:3 But the one who prophesies speaks to people for their strengthening, encouragement, and consolation.
1CO 14:4 The one who speaks in a tongue builds himself up, but the one who prophesies builds up the church.
1CO 14:5 I wish you all spoke in tongues, but even more that you would prophesy. The one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets so that the church may be strengthened.
1CO 14:6 Now, brothers and sisters, if I come to you speaking in tongues, how will I help you unless I speak to you with a revelation or with knowledge or prophecy or teaching?
1CO 14:7 It is similar for lifeless things that make a sound, like a flute or harp. Unless they make a distinction in the notes, how can what is played on the flute or harp be understood?
1CO 14:8 If, for example, the trumpet makes an unclear sound, who will get ready for battle?
1CO 14:9 It is the same for you. If you do not speak clearly with your tongue, how will anyone know what is being said? For you will be speaking into the air.
1CO 14:10 There are probably many kinds of languages in the world, and none is without meaning.
1CO 14:11 If then I do not know the meaning of a language, I will be a foreigner to the speaker and the speaker a foreigner to me.
1CO 14:12 It is the same with you. Since you are eager for manifestations of the Spirit, seek to abound in order to strengthen the church.
1CO 14:13 So then, one who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may interpret.
1CO 14:14 If I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unproductive.
1CO 14:15 What should I do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will also pray with my mind. I will sing praises with my spirit, but I will also sing praises with my mind.
1CO 14:16 Otherwise, if you are praising God with your spirit, how can someone without the gift say “Amen” to your thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying?
1CO 14:17 For you are certainly giving thanks well, but the other person is not strengthened.
1CO 14:18 I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you,
1CO 14:19 but in the church I want to speak five words with my mind to instruct others, rather than ten thousand words in a tongue.
1CO 14:20 Brothers and sisters, do not be children in your thinking. Instead, be infants in evil, but in your thinking be mature.
1CO 14:21 It is written in the law: “ By people with strange tongues and by the lips of strangers I will speak to this people, yet not even in this way will they listen to me,” says the Lord.
1CO 14:22 So then, tongues are a sign not for believers but for unbelievers. Prophecy, however, is not for unbelievers but for believers.
1CO 14:23 So if the whole church comes together and all speak in tongues, and unbelievers or uninformed people enter, will they not say that you have lost your minds?
1CO 14:24 But if all prophesy, and an unbeliever or uninformed person enters, he will be convicted by all, he will be called to account by all.
1CO 14:25 The secrets of his heart are disclosed, and in this way he will fall down with his face to the ground and worship God, declaring, “God is really among you.”
1CO 14:26 What should you do then, brothers and sisters? When you come together, each one has a song, has a lesson, has a revelation, has a tongue, has an interpretation. Let all these things be done for the strengthening of the church.
1CO 14:27 If someone speaks in a tongue, it should be two, or at the most three, one after the other, and someone must interpret.
1CO 14:28 But if there is no interpreter, he should be silent in the church. Let him speak to himself and to God.
1CO 14:29 Two or three prophets should speak and the others should evaluate what is said.
1CO 14:30 And if someone sitting down receives a revelation, the person who is speaking should conclude.
1CO 14:31 For you can all prophesy one after another, so all can learn and be encouraged.
1CO 14:32 Indeed, the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets,
1CO 14:33 for God is not characterized by disorder but by peace. As in all the churches of the saints,
1CO 14:34 the women should be silent in the churches, for they are not permitted to speak. Rather, let them be in submission, as in fact the law says.
1CO 14:35 If they want to find out about something, they should ask their husbands at home, because it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in church.
1CO 14:36 Did the word of God begin with you, or did it come to you alone?
1CO 14:37 If anyone considers himself a prophet or spiritual person, he should acknowledge that what I write to you is the Lord’s command.
1CO 14:38 If someone does not recognize this, he is not recognized.
1CO 14:39 So then, brothers and sisters, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid anyone from speaking in tongues.
1CO 14:40 And do everything in a decent and orderly manner.
1CO 15:1 Now I want to make clear for you, brothers and sisters, the gospel that I preached to you, that you received and on which you stand,
1CO 15:2 and by which you are being saved, if you hold firmly to the message I preached to you – unless you believed in vain.
1CO 15:3 For I passed on to you as of first importance what I also received – that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures,
1CO 15:4 and that he was buried, and that he was raised on the third day according to the scriptures,
1CO 15:5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
1CO 15:6 Then he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers and sisters at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep.
1CO 15:7 Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
1CO 15:8 Last of all, as though to one born at the wrong time, he appeared to me also.
1CO 15:9 For I am the least of the apostles, unworthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
1CO 15:10 But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace to me has not been in vain. In fact, I worked harder than all of them – yet not I, but the grace of God with me.
1CO 15:11 Whether then it was I or they, this is the way we preach and this is the way you believed.
1CO 15:12 Now if Christ is being preached as raised from the dead, how can some of you say there is no resurrection of the dead?
1CO 15:13 But if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised.
1CO 15:14 And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is futile and your faith is empty.
1CO 15:15 Also, we are found to be false witnesses about God, because we have testified against God that he raised Christ from the dead, when in reality he did not raise him, if indeed the dead are not raised.
1CO 15:16 For if the dead are not raised, then not even Christ has been raised.
1CO 15:17 And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is useless; you are still in your sins.
1CO 15:18 Furthermore, those who have fallen asleep in Christ have also perished.
1CO 15:19 For if only in this life we have hope in Christ, we should be pitied more than anyone.
1CO 15:20 But now Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
1CO 15:21 For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead also came through a man.
1CO 15:22 For just as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.
1CO 15:23 But each in his own order: Christ, the firstfruits; then when Christ comes, those who belong to him.
1CO 15:24 Then comes the end, when he hands over the kingdom to God the Father, when he has brought to an end all rule and all authority and power.
1CO 15:25 For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
1CO 15:26 The last enemy to be eliminated is death.
1CO 15:27 For he has put everything in subjection under his feet everything in subjection under his feet. But when it says “everything” has been put in subjection, it is clear that this does not include the one who put everything in subjection to him.
1CO 15:28 And when all things are subjected to him, then the Son himself will be subjected to the one who subjected everything to him, so that God may be all in all.
1CO 15:29 Otherwise, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, then why are they baptized for them?
1CO 15:30 Why too are we in danger every hour?
1CO 15:31 Every day I am in danger of death! This is as sure as my boasting in you, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
1CO 15:32 If from a human point of view I fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, what did it benefit me? If the dead are not raised, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.
1CO 15:33 Do not be deceived: “Bad company corrupts good morals.”
1CO 15:34 Sober up as you should, and stop sinning! For some have no knowledge of God – I say this to your shame!
1CO 15:35 But someone will say, “How are the dead raised? With what kind of body will they come?”
1CO 15:36 Fool! What you sow will not come to life unless it dies.
1CO 15:37 And what you sow is not the body that is to be, but a bare seed – perhaps of wheat or something else.
1CO 15:38 But God gives it a body just as he planned, and to each of the seeds a body of its own.
1CO 15:39 All flesh is not the same: People have one flesh, animals have another, birds and fish another.
1CO 15:40 And there are heavenly bodies and earthly bodies. The glory of the heavenly body is one sort and the earthly another.
1CO 15:41 There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon and another glory of the stars, for star differs from star in glory.
1CO 15:42 It is the same with the resurrection of the dead. What is sown is perishable, what is raised is imperishable.
1CO 15:43 It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
1CO 15:44 it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body.
1CO 15:45 So also it is written, “ The first man, Adam, became a living person”; the last Adam became a life-giving spirit.
1CO 15:46 However, the spiritual did not come first, but the natural, and then the spiritual.
1CO 15:47 The first man is from the earth, made of dust; the second man is from heaven.
1CO 15:48 Like the one made of dust, so too are those made of dust, and like the one from heaven, so too those who are heavenly.
1CO 15:49 And just as we have borne the image of the man of dust, let us also bear the image of the man of heaven.
1CO 15:50 Now this is what I am saying, brothers and sisters: Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit the imperishable.
1CO 15:51 Listen, I will tell you a mystery: We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed –
1CO 15:52 in a moment, in the blinking of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed.
1CO 15:53 For this perishable body must put on the imperishable, and this mortal body must put on immortality.
1CO 15:54 Now when this perishable puts on the imperishable, and this mortal puts on immortality, then the saying that is written will happen, “ Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
1CO 15:55 “ Where, O death, is your victory? Where, O death, is your sting?”
1CO 15:56 The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
1CO 15:57 But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!
1CO 15:58 So then, dear brothers and sisters, be firm. Do not be moved! Always be outstanding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
1CO 16:1 With regard to the collection for the saints, please follow the directions that I gave to the churches of Galatia:
1CO 16:2 On the first day of the week, each of you should set aside some income and save it to the extent that God has blessed you, so that a collection will not have to be made when I come.
1CO 16:3 Then, when I arrive, I will send those whom you approve with letters of explanation to carry your gift to Jerusalem.
1CO 16:4 And if it seems advisable that I should go also, they will go with me.
1CO 16:5 But I will come to you after I have gone through Macedonia – for I will be going through Macedonia –
1CO 16:6 and perhaps I will stay with you, or even spend the winter, so that you can send me on my journey, wherever I go.
1CO 16:7 For I do not want to see you now in passing, since I hope to spend some time with you, if the Lord allows.
1CO 16:8 But I will stay in Ephesus until Pentecost,
1CO 16:9 because a door of great opportunity stands wide open for me, but there are many opponents.
1CO 16:10 Now if Timothy comes, see that he has nothing to fear among you, for he is doing the Lord’s work, as I am too.
1CO 16:11 So then, let no one treat him with contempt. But send him on his way in peace so that he may come to me. For I am expecting him with the brothers.
1CO 16:12 With regard to our brother Apollos: I strongly encouraged him to visit you with the other brothers, but it was simply not his intention to come now. He will come when he has the opportunity.
1CO 16:13 Stay alert, stand firm in the faith, show courage, be strong.
1CO 16:14 Everything you do should be done in love.
1CO 16:15 Now, brothers and sisters, you know about the household of Stephanus, that as the first converts of Achaia, they devoted themselves to ministry for the saints. I urge you
1CO 16:16 also to submit to people like this, and to everyone who cooperates in the work and labors hard.
1CO 16:17 I was glad about the arrival of Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus because they have supplied the fellowship with you that I lacked.
1CO 16:18 For they refreshed my spirit and yours. So then, recognize people like this.
1CO 16:19 The churches in the province of Asia send greetings to you. Aquila and Prisca greet you warmly in the Lord, with the church that meets in their house.
1CO 16:20 All the brothers and sisters send greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
1CO 16:21 I, Paul, send this greeting with my own hand.
1CO 16:22 Let anyone who has no love for the Lord be accursed. Our Lord, come!
1CO 16:23 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
1CO 16:24 My love be with all of you in Christ Jesus.
2CO 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the church of God that is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia.
2CO 1:2 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
2CO 1:3 Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort,
2CO 1:4 who comforts us in all our troubles so that we may be able to comfort those experiencing any trouble with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.
2CO 1:5 For just as the sufferings of Christ overflow toward us, so also our comfort through Christ overflows to you.
2CO 1:6 But if we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation; if we are comforted, it is for your comfort that you experience in your patient endurance of the same sufferings that we also suffer.
2CO 1:7 And our hope for you is steadfast because we know that as you share in our sufferings, so also you will share in our comfort.
2CO 1:8 For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, regarding the affliction that happened to us in the province of Asia, that we were burdened excessively, beyond our strength, so that we despaired even of living.
2CO 1:9 Indeed we felt as if the sentence of death had been passed against us, so that we would not trust in ourselves but in God who raises the dead.
2CO 1:10 He delivered us from so great a risk of death, and he will deliver us. We have set our hope on him that he will deliver us yet again,
2CO 1:11 as you also join in helping us by prayer, so that many people may give thanks to God on our behalf for the gracious gift given to us through the help of many.
2CO 1:12 For our reason for confidence is this: the testimony of our conscience, that with pure motives and sincerity which are from God – not by human wisdom but by the grace of God – we conducted ourselves in the world, and all the more toward you.
2CO 1:13 For we do not write you anything other than what you can read and also understand. But I hope that you will understand completely
2CO 1:14 just as also you have partly understood us, that we are your source of pride just as you also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
2CO 1:15 And with this confidence I intended to come to you first so that you would get a second opportunity to see us,
2CO 1:16 and through your help to go on into Macedonia and then from Macedonia to come back to you and be helped on our way into Judea by you.
2CO 1:17 Therefore when I was planning to do this, I did not do so without thinking about what I was doing, did I? Or do I make my plans according to mere human standards so that I would be saying both “Yes, yes” and “No, no” at the same time?
2CO 1:18 But as God is faithful, our message to you is not “Yes” and “No.”
2CO 1:19 For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, the one who was proclaimed among you by us – by me and Silvanus and Timothy – was not “Yes” and “No,” but it has always been “Yes” in him.
2CO 1:20 For every one of God’s promises are “Yes” in him; therefore also through him the “Amen” is spoken, to the glory we give to God.
2CO 1:21 But it is God who establishes us together with you in Christ and who anointed us,
2CO 1:22 who also sealed us and gave us the Spirit in our hearts as a down payment.
2CO 1:23 Now I appeal to God as my witness, that to spare you I did not come again to Corinth.
2CO 1:24 I do not mean that we rule over your faith, but we are workers with you for your joy, because by faith you stand firm.
2CO 2:1 So I made up my own mind not to pay you another painful visit.
2CO 2:2 For if I make you sad, who would be left to make me glad but the one I caused to be sad?
2CO 2:3 And I wrote this very thing to you, so that when I came I would not have sadness from those who ought to make me rejoice, since I am confident in you all that my joy would be yours.
2CO 2:4 For out of great distress and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not to make you sad, but to let you know the love that I have especially for you.
2CO 2:5 But if anyone has caused sadness, he has not saddened me alone, but to some extent (not to exaggerate) he has saddened all of you as well.
2CO 2:6 This punishment on such an individual by the majority is enough for him,
2CO 2:7 so that now instead you should rather forgive and comfort him. This will keep him from being overwhelmed by excessive grief to the point of despair.
2CO 2:8 Therefore I urge you to reaffirm your love for him.
2CO 2:9 For this reason also I wrote you: to test you to see if you are obedient in everything.
2CO 2:10 If you forgive anyone for anything, I also forgive him – for indeed what I have forgiven (if I have forgiven anything) I did so for you in the presence of Christ,
2CO 2:11 so that we may not be exploited by Satan (for we are not ignorant of his schemes).
2CO 2:12 Now when I arrived in Troas to proclaim the gospel of Christ, even though the Lord had opened a door of opportunity for me,
2CO 2:13 I had no relief in my spirit, because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I said good-bye to them and set out for Macedonia.
2CO 2:14 But thanks be to God who always leads us in triumphal procession in Christ and who makes known through us the fragrance that consists of the knowledge of him in every place.
2CO 2:15 For we are a sweet aroma of Christ to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing –
2CO 2:16 to the latter an odor from death to death, but to the former a fragrance from life to life. And who is adequate for these things?
2CO 2:17 For we are not like so many others, hucksters who peddle the word of God for profit, but we are speaking in Christ before God as persons of sincerity, as persons sent from God.
2CO 3:1 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? We don’t need letters of recommendation to you or from you as some other people do, do we?
2CO 3:2 You yourselves are our letter, written on our hearts, known and read by everyone,
2CO 3:3 revealing that you are a letter of Christ, delivered by us, written not with ink but by the Spirit of the living God, not on stone tablets but on tablets of human hearts.
2CO 3:4 Now we have such confidence in God through Christ.
2CO 3:5 Not that we are adequate in ourselves to consider anything as if it were coming from ourselves, but our adequacy is from God,
2CO 3:6 who made us adequate to be servants of a new covenant not based on the letter but on the Spirit, for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
2CO 3:7 But if the ministry that produced death – carved in letters on stone tablets – came with glory, so that the Israelites could not keep their eyes fixed on the face of Moses because of the glory of his face (a glory which was made ineffective),
2CO 3:8 how much more glorious will the ministry of the Spirit be?
2CO 3:9 For if there was glory in the ministry that produced condemnation, how much more does the ministry that produces righteousness excel in glory!
2CO 3:10 For indeed, what had been glorious now has no glory because of the tremendously greater glory of what replaced it.
2CO 3:11 For if what was made ineffective came with glory, how much more has what remains come in glory!
2CO 3:12 Therefore, since we have such a hope, we behave with great boldness,
2CO 3:13 and not like Moses who used to put a veil over his face to keep the Israelites from staring at the result of the glory that was made ineffective.
2CO 3:14 But their minds were closed. For to this very day, the same veil remains when they hear the old covenant read. It has not been removed because only in Christ is it taken away.
2CO 3:15 But until this very day whenever Moses is read, a veil lies over their minds,
2CO 3:16 but when one turns to the Lord, the veil is removed.
2CO 3:17 Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is present, there is freedom.
2CO 3:18 And we all, with unveiled faces reflecting the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another, which is from the Lord, who is the Spirit.
2CO 4:1 Therefore, since we have this ministry, just as God has shown us mercy, we do not become discouraged.
2CO 4:2 But we have rejected shameful hidden deeds, not behaving with deceptiveness or distorting the word of God, but by open proclamation of the truth we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience before God.
2CO 4:3 But even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled only to those who are perishing,
2CO 4:4 among whom the god of this age has blinded the minds of those who do not believe so they would not see the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God.
2CO 4:5 For we do not proclaim ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your slaves for Jesus’ sake.
2CO 4:6 For God, who said “ Let light shine out of darkness,” is the one who shined in our hearts to give us the light of the glorious knowledge of God in the face of Christ.
2CO 4:7 But we have this treasure in clay jars, so that the extraordinary power belongs to God and does not come from us.
2CO 4:8 We are experiencing trouble on every side, but are not crushed; we are perplexed, but not driven to despair;
2CO 4:9 we are persecuted, but not abandoned; we are knocked down, but not destroyed,
2CO 4:10 always carrying around in our body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be made visible in our body.
2CO 4:11 For we who are alive are constantly being handed over to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be made visible in our mortal body.
2CO 4:12 As a result, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
2CO 4:13 But since we have the same spirit of faith as that shown in what has been written, “ I believed; therefore I spoke,” we also believe, therefore we also speak.
2CO 4:14 We do so because we know that the one who raised up Jesus will also raise us up with Jesus and will bring us with you into his presence.
2CO 4:15 For all these things are for your sake, so that the grace that is including more and more people may cause thanksgiving to increase to the glory of God.
2CO 4:16 Therefore we do not despair, but even if our physical body is wearing away, our inner person is being renewed day by day.
2CO 4:17 For our momentary, light suffering is producing for us an eternal weight of glory far beyond all comparison
2CO 4:18 because we are not looking at what can be seen but at what cannot be seen. For what can be seen is temporary, but what cannot be seen is eternal.
2CO 5:1 For we know that if our earthly house, the tent we live in, is dismantled, we have a building from God, a house not built by human hands, that is eternal in the heavens.
2CO 5:2 For in this earthly house we groan, because we desire to put on our heavenly dwelling,
2CO 5:3 if indeed, after we have put on our heavenly house, we will not be found naked.
2CO 5:4 For we groan while we are in this tent, since we are weighed down, because we do not want to be unclothed, but clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
2CO 5:5 Now the one who prepared us for this very purpose is God, who gave us the Spirit as a down payment.
2CO 5:6 Therefore we are always full of courage, and we know that as long as we are alive here on earth we are absent from the Lord –
2CO 5:7 for we live by faith, not by sight.
2CO 5:8 Thus we are full of courage and would prefer to be away from the body and at home with the Lord.
2CO 5:9 So then whether we are alive or away, we make it our ambition to please him.
2CO 5:10 For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may be paid back according to what he has done while in the body, whether good or evil.
2CO 5:11 Therefore, because we know the fear of the Lord, we try to persuade people, but we are well known to God, and I hope we are well known to your consciences too.
2CO 5:12 We are not trying to commend ourselves to you again, but are giving you an opportunity to be proud of us, so that you may be able to answer those who take pride in outward appearance and not in what is in the heart.
2CO 5:13 For if we are out of our minds, it is for God; if we are of sound mind, it is for you.
2CO 5:14 For the love of Christ controls us, since we have concluded this, that Christ died for all; therefore all have died.
2CO 5:15 And he died for all so that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them and was raised.
2CO 5:16 So then from now on we acknowledge no one from an outward human point of view. Even though we have known Christ from such a human point of view, now we do not know him in that way any longer.
2CO 5:17 So then, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; what is old has passed away – look, what is new has come!
2CO 5:18 And all these things are from God who reconciled us to himself through Christ, and who has given us the ministry of reconciliation.
2CO 5:19 In other words, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting people’s trespasses against them, and he has given us the message of reconciliation.
2CO 5:20 Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God were making His plea through us. We plead with you on Christ’s behalf, “Be reconciled to God!”
2CO 5:21 God made the one who did not know sin to be sin for us, so that in him we would become the righteousness of God.
2CO 6:1 Now because we are fellow workers, we also urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain.
2CO 6:2 For he says, “ I heard you at the acceptable time, and in the day of salvation I helped you.” Look, now is the acceptable time; look, now is the day of salvation!
2CO 6:3 We do not give anyone an occasion for taking an offense in anything, so that no fault may be found with our ministry.
2CO 6:4 But as God’s servants, we have commended ourselves in every way, with great endurance, in persecutions, in difficulties, in distresses,
2CO 6:5 in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in troubles, in sleepless nights, in hunger,
2CO 6:6 by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by benevolence, by the Holy Spirit, by genuine love,
2CO 6:7 by truthful teaching, by the power of God, with weapons of righteousness both for the right hand and for the left,
2CO 6:8 through glory and dishonor, through slander and praise; regarded as impostors, and yet true;
2CO 6:9 as unknown, and yet well-known; as dying and yet – see! – we continue to live; as those who are scourged and yet not executed;
2CO 6:10 as sorrowful, but always rejoicing, as poor, but making many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing everything.
2CO 6:11 We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians; our heart has been opened wide to you.
2CO 6:12 Our affection for you is not restricted, but you are restricted in your affections for us.
2CO 6:13 Now as a fair exchange – I speak as to my children – open wide your hearts to us also.
2CO 6:14 Do not become partners with those who do not believe, for what partnership is there between righteousness and lawlessness, or what fellowship does light have with darkness?
2CO 6:15 And what agreement does Christ have with Beliar? Or what does a believer share in common with an unbeliever?
2CO 6:16 And what mutual agreement does the temple of God have with idols? For we are the temple of the living God, just as God said, “ I will live in them and will walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people: *.”
2CO 6:17 Therefore “ come out from their midst, and be separate,” says the Lord, “ and touch no unclean thing, and I will welcome you,
2CO 6:18 and I will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters,” says the All-Powerful Lord.
2CO 7:1 Therefore, since we have these promises, dear friends, let us cleanse ourselves from everything that could defile the body and the spirit, and thus accomplish holiness out of reverence for God.
2CO 7:2 Make room for us in your hearts; we have wronged no one, we have ruined no one, we have exploited no one.
2CO 7:3 I do not say this to condemn you, for I told you before that you are in our hearts so that we die together and live together with you.
2CO 7:4 I have great confidence in you; I take great pride on your behalf. I am filled with encouragement; I am overflowing with joy in the midst of all our suffering.
2CO 7:5 For even when we came into Macedonia, our body had no rest at all, but we were troubled in every way – struggles from the outside, fears from within.
2CO 7:6 But God, who encourages the downhearted, encouraged us by the arrival of Titus.
2CO 7:7 We were encouraged not only by his arrival, but also by the encouragement you gave him, as he reported to us your longing, your mourning, your deep concern for me, so that I rejoiced more than ever.
2CO 7:8 For even if I made you sad by my letter, I do not regret having written it (even though I did regret it, for I see that my letter made you sad, though only for a short time).
2CO 7:9 Now I rejoice, not because you were made sad, but because you were made sad to the point of repentance. For you were made sad as God intended, so that you were not harmed in any way by us.
2CO 7:10 For sadness as intended by God produces a repentance that leads to salvation, leaving no regret, but worldly sadness brings about death.
2CO 7:11 For see what this very thing, this sadness as God intended, has produced in you: what eagerness, what defense of yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what deep concern, what punishment! In everything you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter.
2CO 7:12 So then, even though I wrote to you, it was not on account of the one who did wrong, or on account of the one who was wronged, but to reveal to you your eagerness on our behalf before God.
2CO 7:13 Therefore we have been encouraged. And in addition to our own encouragement, we rejoiced even more at the joy of Titus, because all of you have refreshed his spirit.
2CO 7:14 For if I have boasted to him about anything concerning you, I have not been embarrassed by you, but just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting to Titus about you has proved true as well.
2CO 7:15 And his affection for you is much greater when he remembers the obedience of you all, how you welcomed him with fear and trembling.
2CO 7:16 I rejoice because in everything I am fully confident in you.
2CO 8:1 Now we make known to you, brothers and sisters, the grace of God given to the churches of Macedonia,
2CO 8:2 that during a severe ordeal of suffering, their abundant joy and their extreme poverty have overflowed in the wealth of their generosity.
2CO 8:3 For I testify, they gave according to their means and beyond their means. They did so voluntarily,
2CO 8:4 begging us with great earnestness for the blessing and fellowship of helping the saints.
2CO 8:5 And they did this not just as we had hoped, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and to us by the will of God.
2CO 8:6 Thus we urged Titus that, just as he had previously begun this work, so also he should complete this act of kindness for you.
2CO 8:7 But as you excel in everything – in faith, in speech, in knowledge, and in all eagerness and in the love from us that is in you – make sure that you excel in this act of kindness too.
2CO 8:8 I am not saying this as a command, but I am testing the genuineness of your love by comparison with the eagerness of others.
2CO 8:9 For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he was rich, he became poor for your sakes, so that you by his poverty could become rich.
2CO 8:10 So here is my opinion on this matter: It is to your advantage, since you made a good start last year both in your giving and your desire to give,
2CO 8:11 to finish what you started, so that just as you wanted to do it eagerly, you can also complete it according to your means.
2CO 8:12 For if the eagerness is present, the gift itself is acceptable according to whatever one has, not according to what he does not have.
2CO 8:13 For I do not say this so there would be relief for others and suffering for you, but as a matter of equality.
2CO 8:14 At the present time, your abundance will meet their need, so that one day their abundance may also meet your need, and thus there may be equality,
2CO 8:15 as it is written: “ The one who gathered much did not have too much, and the one who gathered little did not have too little.”
2CO 8:16 But thanks be to God who put in the heart of Titus the same devotion I have for you,
2CO 8:17 because he not only accepted our request, but since he was very eager, he is coming to you of his own accord.
2CO 8:18 And we are sending along with him the brother who is praised by all the churches for his work in spreading the gospel.
2CO 8:19 In addition, this brother has also been chosen by the churches as our traveling companion as we administer this generous gift to the glory of the Lord himself and to show our readiness to help.
2CO 8:20 We did this as a precaution so that no one should blame us in regard to this generous gift we are administering.
2CO 8:21 For we are concerned about what is right not only before the Lord but also before men.
2CO 8:22 And we are sending with them our brother whom we have tested many times and found eager in many matters, but who now is much more eager than ever because of the great confidence he has in you.
2CO 8:23 If there is any question about Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker among you; if there is any question about our brothers, they are messengers of the churches, a glory to Christ.
2CO 8:24 Therefore show them openly before the churches the proof of your love and of our pride in you.
2CO 9:1 For it is not necessary for me to write you about this service to the saints,
2CO 9:2 because I know your eagerness to help. I keep boasting to the Macedonians about this eagerness of yours, that Achaia has been ready to give since last year, and your zeal to participate has stirred up most of them.
2CO 9:3 But I am sending these brothers so that our boasting about you may not be empty in this case, so that you may be ready just as I kept telling them.
2CO 9:4 For if any of the Macedonians should come with me and find that you are not ready to give, we would be humiliated (not to mention you) by this confidence we had in you.
2CO 9:5 Therefore I thought it necessary to urge these brothers to go to you in advance and to arrange ahead of time the generous contribution you had promised, so this may be ready as a generous gift and not as something you feel forced to do.
2CO 9:6 My point is this: The person who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and the person who sows generously will also reap generously.
2CO 9:7 Each one of you should give just as he has decided in his heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion, because God loves a cheerful giver.
2CO 9:8 And God is able to make all grace overflow to you so that because you have enough of everything in every way at all times, you will overflow in every good work.
2CO 9:9 Just as it is written, “ He has scattered widely, he has given to the poor; his righteousness remains forever.”
2CO 9:10 Now God who provides seed for the sower and bread for food will provide and multiply your supply of seed and will cause the harvest of your righteousness to grow.
2CO 9:11 You will be enriched in every way so that you may be generous on every occasion, which is producing through us thanksgiving to God,
2CO 9:12 because the service of this ministry is not only providing for the needs of the saints but is also overflowing with many thanks to God.
2CO 9:13 Through the evidence of this service they will glorify God because of your obedience to your confession in the gospel of Christ and the generosity of your sharing with them and with everyone.
2CO 9:14 And in their prayers on your behalf they long for you because of the extraordinary grace God has shown to you.
2CO 9:15 Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift!
2CO 10:1 Now I, Paul, appeal to you personally by the meekness and gentleness of Christ (I who am meek when present among you, but am full of courage toward you when away!) –
2CO 10:2 now I ask that when I am present I may not have to be bold with the confidence that (I expect) I will dare to use against some who consider us to be behaving according to human standards.
2CO 10:3 For though we live as human beings, we do not wage war according to human standards,
2CO 10:4 for the weapons of our warfare are not human weapons, but are made powerful by God for tearing down strongholds. We tear down arguments
2CO 10:5 and every arrogant obstacle that is raised up against the knowledge of God, and we take every thought captive to make it obey Christ.
2CO 10:6 We are also ready to punish every act of disobedience, whenever your obedience is complete.
2CO 10:7 You are looking at outward appearances. If anyone is confident that he belongs to Christ, he should reflect on this again: Just as he himself belongs to Christ, so too do we.
2CO 10:8 For if I boast somewhat more about our authority that the Lord gave us for building you up and not for tearing you down, I will not be ashamed of doing so.
2CO 10:9 I do not want to seem as though I am trying to terrify you with my letters,
2CO 10:10 because some say, “His letters are weighty and forceful, but his physical presence is weak and his speech is of no account.”
2CO 10:11 Let such a person consider this: What we say by letters when we are absent, we also are in actions when we are present.
2CO 10:12 For we would not dare to classify or compare ourselves with some of those who recommend themselves. But when they measure themselves by themselves and compare themselves with themselves, they are without understanding.
2CO 10:13 But we will not boast beyond certain limits, but will confine our boasting according to the limits of the work to which God has appointed us, that reaches even as far as you.
2CO 10:14 For we were not overextending ourselves, as though we did not reach as far as you, because we were the first to reach as far as you with the gospel about Christ.
2CO 10:15 Nor do we boast beyond certain limits in the work done by others, but we hope that as your faith continues to grow, our work may be greatly expanded among you according to our limits,
2CO 10:16 so that we may preach the gospel in the regions that lie beyond you, and not boast of work already done in another person’s area.
2CO 10:17 But the one who boasts must boast in the Lord must boast in the Lord.
2CO 10:18 For it is not the person who commends himself who is approved, but the person the Lord commends.
2CO 11:1 I wish that you would be patient with me in a little foolishness, but indeed you are being patient with me!
2CO 11:2 For I am jealous for you with godly jealousy, because I promised you in marriage to one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
2CO 11:3 But I am afraid that just as the serpent deceived Eve by his treachery, your minds may be led astray from a sincere and pure devotion to Christ.
2CO 11:4 For if someone comes and proclaims another Jesus different from the one we proclaimed, or if you receive a different spirit than the one you received, or a different gospel than the one you accepted, you put up with it well enough!
2CO 11:5 For I consider myself not at all inferior to those “super-apostles.”
2CO 11:6 And even if I am unskilled in speaking, yet I am certainly not so in knowledge. Indeed, we have made this plain to you in everything in every way.
2CO 11:7 Or did I commit a sin by humbling myself so that you could be exalted, because I proclaimed the gospel of God to you free of charge?
2CO 11:8 I robbed other churches by receiving support from them so that I could serve you!
2CO 11:9 When I was with you and was in need, I was not a burden to anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia fully supplied my needs. I kept myself from being a burden to you in any way, and will continue to do so.
2CO 11:10 As the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting of mine will not be stopped in the regions of Achaia.
2CO 11:11 Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!
2CO 11:12 And what I am doing I will continue to do, so that I may eliminate any opportunity for those who want a chance to be regarded as our equals in the things they boast about.
2CO 11:13 For such people are false apostles, deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ.
2CO 11:14 And no wonder, for even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light.
2CO 11:15 Therefore it is not surprising his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness, whose end will correspond to their actions.
2CO 11:16 I say again, let no one think that I am a fool. But if you do, then at least accept me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little.
2CO 11:17 What I am saying with this boastful confidence I do not say the way the Lord would. Instead it is, as it were, foolishness.
2CO 11:18 Since many are boasting according to human standards, I too will boast.
2CO 11:19 For since you are so wise, you put up with fools gladly.
2CO 11:20 For you put up with it if someone makes slaves of you, if someone exploits you, if someone takes advantage of you, if someone behaves arrogantly toward you, if someone strikes you in the face.
2CO 11:21 (To my disgrace I must say that we were too weak for that!) But whatever anyone else dares to boast about (I am speaking foolishly), I also dare to boast about the same thing.
2CO 11:22 Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I.
2CO 11:23 Are they servants of Christ? (I am talking like I am out of my mind!) I am even more so: with much greater labors, with far more imprisonments, with more severe beatings, facing death many times.
2CO 11:24 Five times I received from the Jews forty lashes less one.
2CO 11:25 Three times I was beaten with a rod. Once I received a stoning. Three times I suffered shipwreck. A night and a day I spent adrift in the open sea.
2CO 11:26 I have been on journeys many times, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from robbers, in dangers from my own countrymen, in dangers from Gentiles, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea, in dangers from false brothers,
2CO 11:27 in hard work and toil, through many sleepless nights, in hunger and thirst, many times without food, in cold and without enough clothing.
2CO 11:28 Apart from other things, there is the daily pressure on me of my anxious concern for all the churches.
2CO 11:29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is led into sin, and I do not burn with indignation?
2CO 11:30 If I must boast, I will boast about the things that show my weakness.
2CO 11:31 The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is blessed forever, knows I am not lying.
2CO 11:32 In Damascus, the governor under King Aretas was guarding the city of Damascus in order to arrest me,
2CO 11:33 but I was let down in a rope-basket through a window in the city wall, and escaped his hands.
2CO 12:1 It is necessary to go on boasting. Though it is not profitable, I will go on to visions and revelations from the Lord.
2CO 12:2 I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows) was caught up to the third heaven.
2CO 12:3 And I know that this man (whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, God knows)
2CO 12:4 was caught up into paradise and heard things too sacred to be put into words, things that a person is not permitted to speak.
2CO 12:5 On behalf of such an individual I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except about my weaknesses.
2CO 12:6 For even if I wish to boast, I will not be a fool, for I would be telling the truth, but I refrain from this so that no one may regard me beyond what he sees in me or what he hears from me,
2CO 12:7 even because of the extraordinary character of the revelations. Therefore, so that I would not become arrogant, a thorn in the flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan to trouble me – so that I would not become arrogant.
2CO 12:8 I asked the Lord three times about this, that it would depart from me.
2CO 12:9 But he said to me, “My grace is enough for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” So then, I will boast most gladly about my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may reside in me.
2CO 12:10 Therefore I am content with weaknesses, with insults, with troubles, with persecutions and difficulties for the sake of Christ, for whenever I am weak, then I am strong.
2CO 12:11 I have become a fool. You yourselves forced me to do it, for I should have been commended by you. For I lack nothing in comparison to those “super-apostles,” even though I am nothing.
2CO 12:12 Indeed, the signs of an apostle were performed among you with great perseverance by signs and wonders and powerful deeds.
2CO 12:13 For how were you treated worse than the other churches, except that I myself was not a burden to you? Forgive me this injustice!
2CO 12:14 Look, for the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a burden to you, because I do not want your possessions, but you. For children should not have to save up for their parents, but parents for their children.
2CO 12:15 Now I will most gladly spend and be spent for your lives! If I love you more, am I to be loved less?
2CO 12:16 But be that as it may, I have not burdened you. Yet because I was a crafty person, I took you in by deceit!
2CO 12:17 I have not taken advantage of you through anyone I have sent to you, have I?
2CO 12:18 I urged Titus to visit you and I sent our brother along with him. Titus did not take advantage of you, did he? Did we not conduct ourselves in the same spirit? Did we not behave in the same way?
2CO 12:19 Have you been thinking all this time that we have been defending ourselves to you? We are speaking in Christ before God, and everything we do, dear friends, is to build you up.
2CO 12:20 For I am afraid that somehow when I come I will not find you what I wish, and you will find me not what you wish. I am afraid that somehow there may be quarreling, jealousy, intense anger, selfish ambition, slander, gossip, arrogance, and disorder.
2CO 12:21 I am afraid that when I come again, my God may humiliate me before you, and I will grieve for many of those who previously sinned and have not repented of the impurity, sexual immorality, and licentiousness that they have practiced.
2CO 13:1 This is the third time I am coming to visit you. By the testimony the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter will be established.
2CO 13:2 I said before when I was present the second time and now, though absent, I say again to those who sinned previously and to all the rest, that if I come again, I will not spare anyone,
2CO 13:3 since you are demanding proof that Christ is speaking through me. He is not weak toward you but is powerful among you.
2CO 13:4 For indeed he was crucified by reason of weakness, but he lives because of God’s power. For we also are weak in him, but we will live together with him, because of God’s power toward you.
2CO 13:5 Put yourselves to the test to see if you are in the faith; examine yourselves! Or do you not recognize regarding yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you – unless, indeed, you fail the test!
2CO 13:6 And I hope that you will realize that we have not failed the test!
2CO 13:7 Now we pray to God that you may not do anything wrong, not so that we may appear to have passed the test, but so that you may do what is right even if we may appear to have failed the test.
2CO 13:8 For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the sake of the truth.
2CO 13:9 For we rejoice whenever we are weak, but you are strong. And we pray for this: that you may become fully qualified.
2CO 13:10 Because of this I am writing these things while absent, so that when I arrive I may not have to deal harshly with you by using my authority – the Lord gave it to me for building up, not for tearing down!
2CO 13:11 Finally, brothers and sisters, rejoice, set things right, be encouraged, agree with one another, live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
2CO 13:12 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the saints greet you.
2CO 13:13 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
2CO 13:14 
GAL 1:1 From Paul, an apostle (not from men, nor by human agency, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead)
GAL 1:2 and all the brothers with me, to the churches of Galatia.
GAL 1:3 Grace and peace to you from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ,
GAL 1:4 who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from this present evil age according to the will of our God and Father,
GAL 1:5 to whom be glory forever and ever! Amen.
GAL 1:6 I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you by the grace of Christ and are following a different gospel –
GAL 1:7 not that there really is another gospel, but there are some who are disturbing you and wanting to distort the gospel of Christ.
GAL 1:8 But even if we (or an angel from heaven) should preach a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be condemned to hell!
GAL 1:9 As we have said before, and now I say again, if any one is preaching to you a gospel contrary to what you received, let him be condemned to hell!
GAL 1:10 Am I now trying to gain the approval of people, or of God? Or am I trying to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I would not be a slave of Christ!
GAL 1:11 Now I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that the gospel I preached is not of human origin.
GAL 1:12 For I did not receive it or learn it from any human source; instead I received it by a revelation of Jesus Christ.
GAL 1:13 For you have heard of my former way of life in Judaism, how I was savagely persecuting the church of God and trying to destroy it.
GAL 1:14 I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my contemporaries in my nation, and was extremely zealous for the traditions of my ancestors.
GAL 1:15 But when the one who set me apart from birth and called me by his grace was pleased
GAL 1:16 to reveal his Son in me so that I could preach him among the Gentiles, I did not go to ask advice from any human being,
GAL 1:17 nor did I go up to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before me, but right away I departed to Arabia, and then returned to Damascus.
GAL 1:18 Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas and get information from him, and I stayed with him fifteen days.
GAL 1:19 But I saw none of the other apostles except James the Lord’s brother.
GAL 1:20 I assure you that, before God, I am not lying about what I am writing to you!
GAL 1:21 Afterward I went to the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
GAL 1:22 But I was personally unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ.
GAL 1:23 They were only hearing, “The one who once persecuted us is now proclaiming the good news of the faith he once tried to destroy.”
GAL 1:24 So they glorified God because of me.
GAL 2:1 Then after fourteen years I went up to Jerusalem again with Barnabas, taking Titus along too.
GAL 2:2 I went there because of a revelation and presented to them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles. But I did so only in a private meeting with the influential people, to make sure that I was not running – or had not run – in vain.
GAL 2:3 Yet not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, although he was a Greek.
GAL 2:4 Now this matter arose because of the false brothers with false pretenses who slipped in unnoticed to spy on our freedom that we have in Christ Jesus, to make us slaves.
GAL 2:5 But we did not surrender to them even for a moment, in order that the truth of the gospel would remain with you.
GAL 2:6 But from those who were influential (whatever they were makes no difference to me; God shows no favoritism between people ) – those influential leaders added nothing to my message.
GAL 2:7 On the contrary, when they saw that I was entrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcised just as Peter was to the circumcised
GAL 2:8 (for he who empowered Peter for his apostleship to the circumcised also empowered me for my apostleship to the Gentiles)
GAL 2:9 and when James, Cephas, and John, who had a reputation as pillars, recognized the grace that had been given to me, they gave to Barnabas and me the right hand of fellowship, agreeing that we would go to the Gentiles and they to the circumcised.
GAL 2:10 They requested only that we remember the poor, the very thing I also was eager to do.
GAL 2:11 But when Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face, because he had clearly done wrong.
GAL 2:12 Until certain people came from James, he had been eating with the Gentiles. But when they arrived, he stopped doing this and separated himself because he was afraid of those who were pro-circumcision.
GAL 2:13 And the rest of the Jews also joined with him in this hypocrisy, so that even Barnabas was led astray with them by their hypocrisy.
GAL 2:14 But when I saw that they were not behaving consistently with the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas in front of them all, “If you, although you are a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you try to force the Gentiles to live like Jews?”
GAL 2:15 We are Jews by birth and not Gentile sinners,
GAL 2:16 yet we know that no one is justified by the works of the law but by the faithfulness of Jesus Christ. And we have come to believe in Christ Jesus, so that we may be justified by the faithfulness of Christ and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the law no one will be justified.
GAL 2:17 But if while seeking to be justified in Christ we ourselves have also been found to be sinners, is Christ then one who encourages sin? Absolutely not!
GAL 2:18 But if I build up again those things I once destroyed, I demonstrate that I am one who breaks God’s law.
GAL 2:19 For through the law I died to the law so that I may live to God.
GAL 2:20 I have been crucified with Christ, and it is no longer I who live, but Christ lives in me. So the life I now live in the body, I live because of the faithfulness of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.
GAL 2:21 I do not set aside God’s grace, because if righteousness could come through the law, then Christ died for nothing!
GAL 3:1 You foolish Galatians! Who has cast a spell on you? Before your eyes Jesus Christ was vividly portrayed as crucified!
GAL 3:2 The only thing I want to learn from you is this: Did you receive the Spirit by doing the works of the law or by believing what you heard?
GAL 3:3 Are you so foolish? Although you began with the Spirit, are you now trying to finish by human effort?
GAL 3:4 Have you suffered so many things for nothing? – if indeed it was for nothing.
GAL 3:5 Does God then give you the Spirit and work miracles among you by your doing the works of the law or by your believing what you heard?
GAL 3:6 Just as Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness,
GAL 3:7 so then, understand that those who believe are the sons of Abraham.
GAL 3:8 And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, proclaimed the gospel to Abraham ahead of time, saying, “ All the nations will be blessed in you*.”
GAL 3:9 So then those who believe are blessed along with Abraham the believer.
GAL 3:10 For all who rely on doing the works of the law are under a curse, because it is written, “ Cursed is everyone who does not keep on doing everything written in the book of the law.”
GAL 3:11 Now it is clear no one is justified before God by the law, because the righteous one will live by faith.
GAL 3:12 But the law is not based on faith, but the one who does the works of the law will live by them.
GAL 3:13 Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us (because it is written, “ Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree”)
GAL 3:14 in order that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham would come to the Gentiles, so that we could receive the promise of the Spirit by faith.
GAL 3:15 Brothers and sisters, I offer an example from everyday life: When a covenant has been ratified, even though it is only a human contract, no one can set it aside or add anything to it.
GAL 3:16 Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his descendant. Scripture does not say, “and to the descendants,” referring to many, but “ and to your descendant,” referring to one, who is Christ.
GAL 3:17 What I am saying is this: The law that came four hundred thirty years later does not cancel a covenant previously ratified by God, so as to invalidate the promise.
GAL 3:18 For if the inheritance is based on the law, it is no longer based on the promise, but God graciously gave it to Abraham through the promise.
GAL 3:19 Why then was the law given? It was added because of transgressions, until the arrival of the descendant to whom the promise had been made. It was administered through angels by an intermediary.
GAL 3:20 Now an intermediary is not for one party alone, but God is one.
GAL 3:21 Is the law therefore opposed to the promises of God? Absolutely not! For if a law had been given that was able to give life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law.
GAL 3:22 But the scripture imprisoned everything and everyone under sin so that the promise could be given – because of the faithfulness of Jesus Christ – to those who believe.
GAL 3:23 Now before faith came we were held in custody under the law, being kept as prisoners until the coming faith would be revealed.
GAL 3:24 Thus the law had become our guardian until Christ, so that we could be declared righteous by faith.
GAL 3:25 But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.
GAL 3:26 For in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God through faith.
GAL 3:27 For all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ.
GAL 3:28 There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female – for all of you are one in Christ Jesus.
GAL 3:29 And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s descendants, heirs according to the promise.
GAL 4:1 Now I mean that the heir, as long as he is a minor, is no different from a slave, though he is the owner of everything.
GAL 4:2 But he is under guardians and managers until the date set by his father.
GAL 4:3 So also we, when we were minors, were enslaved under the basic forces of the world.
GAL 4:4 But when the appropriate time had come, God sent out his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,
GAL 4:5 to redeem those who were under the law, so that we may be adopted as sons with full rights.
GAL 4:6 And because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, who calls “ Abba! Father!”
GAL 4:7 So you are no longer a slave but a son, and if you are a son, then you are also an heir through God.
GAL 4:8 Formerly when you did not know God, you were enslaved to beings that by nature are not gods at all.
GAL 4:9 But now that you have come to know God (or rather to be known by God), how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless basic forces? Do you want to be enslaved to them all over again?
GAL 4:10 You are observing religious days and months and seasons and years.
GAL 4:11 I fear for you that my work for you may have been in vain.
GAL 4:12 I beg you, brothers and sisters, become like me, because I have become like you. You have done me no wrong!
GAL 4:13 But you know it was because of a physical illness that I first proclaimed the gospel to you,
GAL 4:14 and though my physical condition put you to the test, you did not despise or reject me. Instead, you welcomed me as though I were an angel of God, as though I were Christ Jesus himself!
GAL 4:15 Where then is your sense of happiness now? For I testify about you that if it were possible, you would have pulled out your eyes and given them to me!
GAL 4:16 So then, have I become your enemy by telling you the truth?
GAL 4:17 They court you eagerly, but for no good purpose; they want to exclude you, so that you would seek them eagerly.
GAL 4:18 However, it is good to be sought eagerly for a good purpose at all times, and not only when I am present with you.
GAL 4:19 My children – I am again undergoing birth pains until Christ is formed in you!
GAL 4:20 I wish I could be with you now and change my tone of voice, because I am perplexed about you.
GAL 4:21 Tell me, you who want to be under the law, do you not understand the law?
GAL 4:22 For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.
GAL 4:23 But one, the son by the slave woman, was born by natural descent, while the other, the son by the free woman, was born through the promise.
GAL 4:24 These things may be treated as an allegory, for these women represent two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai bearing children for slavery; this is Hagar.
GAL 4:25 Now Hagar represents Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children.
GAL 4:26 But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.
GAL 4:27 For it is written: “ Rejoice, O barren woman who does not bear children; break forth and shout, you who have no birth pains, because the children of the desolate woman are more numerous than those of the woman who has a husband.”
GAL 4:28 But you, brothers and sisters, are children of the promise like Isaac.
GAL 4:29 But just as at that time the one born by natural descent persecuted the one born according to the Spirit, so it is now.
GAL 4:30 But what does the scripture say? “ Throw out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman will not share the inheritance with the son” of the free woman.
GAL 4:31 Therefore, brothers and sisters, we are not children of the slave woman but of the free woman.
GAL 5:1 For freedom Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not be subject again to the yoke of slavery.
GAL 5:2 Listen! I, Paul, tell you that if you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you at all!
GAL 5:3 And I testify again to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law.
GAL 5:4 You who are trying to be declared righteous by the law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace!
GAL 5:5 For through the Spirit, by faith, we wait expectantly for the hope of righteousness.
GAL 5:6 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision carries any weight – the only thing that matters is faith working through love.
GAL 5:7 You were running well; who prevented you from obeying the truth?
GAL 5:8 This persuasion does not come from the one who calls you!
GAL 5:9 A little yeast makes the whole batch of dough rise!
GAL 5:10 I am confident in the Lord that you will accept no other view. But the one who is confusing you will pay the penalty, whoever he may be.
GAL 5:11 Now, brothers and sisters, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been removed.
GAL 5:12 I wish those agitators would go so far as to castrate themselves!
GAL 5:13 For you were called to freedom, brothers and sisters; only do not use your freedom as an opportunity to indulge your flesh, but through love serve one another.
GAL 5:14 For the whole law can be summed up in a single commandment, namely, “ You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
GAL 5:15 However, if you continually bite and devour one another, beware that you are not consumed by one another.
GAL 5:16 But I say, live by the Spirit and you will not carry out the desires of the flesh.
GAL 5:17 For the flesh has desires that are opposed to the Spirit, and the Spirit has desires that are opposed to the flesh, for these are in opposition to each other, so that you cannot do what you want.
GAL 5:18 But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
GAL 5:19 Now the works of the flesh are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity, depravity,
GAL 5:20 idolatry, sorcery, hostilities, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, selfish rivalries, dissensions, factions,
GAL 5:21 envying, murder, drunkenness, carousing, and similar things. I am warning you, as I had warned you before: Those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God!
GAL 5:22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
GAL 5:23 gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law.
GAL 5:24 Now those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
GAL 5:25 If we live by the Spirit, let us also behave in accordance with the Spirit.
GAL 5:26 Let us not become conceited, provoking one another, being jealous of one another.
GAL 6:1 Brothers and sisters, if a person is discovered in some sin, you who are spiritual restore such a person in a spirit of gentleness. Pay close attention to yourselves, so that you are not tempted too.
GAL 6:2 Carry one another’s burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.
GAL 6:3 For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
GAL 6:4 Let each one examine his own work. Then he can take pride in himself and not compare himself with someone else.
GAL 6:5 For each one will carry his own load.
GAL 6:6 Now the one who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with the one who teaches it.
GAL 6:7 Do not be deceived. God will not be made a fool. For a person will reap what he sows,
GAL 6:8 because the person who sows to his own flesh will reap corruption from the flesh, but the one who sows to the Spirit will reap eternal life from the Spirit.
GAL 6:9 So we must not grow weary in doing good, for in due time we will reap, if we do not give up.
GAL 6:10 So then, whenever we have an opportunity, let us do good to all people, and especially to those who belong to the family of faith.
GAL 6:11 See what big letters I make as I write to you with my own hand!
GAL 6:12 Those who want to make a good showing in external matters are trying to force you to be circumcised. They do so only to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ.
GAL 6:13 For those who are circumcised do not obey the law themselves, but they want you to be circumcised so that they can boast about your flesh.
GAL 6:14 But may I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
GAL 6:15 For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything; the only thing that matters is a new creation!
GAL 6:16 And all who will behave in accordance with this rule, peace and mercy be on them, and on the Israel of God.
GAL 6:17 From now on let no one cause me trouble, for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body.
GAL 6:18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers and sisters. Amen.
EPH 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the saints [in Ephesus], the faithful in Christ Jesus.
EPH 1:2 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
EPH 1:3 Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly realms in Christ.
EPH 1:4 For he chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world that we may be holy and unblemished in his sight in love.
EPH 1:5 He did this by predestining us to adoption as his sons through Jesus Christ, according to the pleasure of his will –
EPH 1:6 to the praise of the glory of his grace that he has freely bestowed on us in his dearly loved Son.
EPH 1:7 In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace
EPH 1:8 that he lavished on us in all wisdom and insight.
EPH 1:9 He did this when he revealed to us the secret of his will, according to his good pleasure that he set forth in Christ,
EPH 1:10 toward the administration of the fullness of the times, to head up all things in Christ – the things in heaven and the things on earth.
EPH 1:11 In Christ we too have been claimed as God’s own possession, since we were predestined according to the one purpose of him who accomplishes all things according to the counsel of his will
EPH 1:12 so that we, who were the first to set our hope on Christ, would be to the praise of his glory.
EPH 1:13 And when you heard the word of truth (the gospel of your salvation) – when you believed in Christ – you were marked with the seal of the promised Holy Spirit,
EPH 1:14 who is the down payment of our inheritance, until the redemption of God’s own possession, to the praise of his glory.
EPH 1:15 For this reason, because I have heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints,
EPH 1:16 I do not cease to give thanks for you when I remember you in my prayers.
EPH 1:17 I pray that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you spiritual wisdom and revelation in your growing knowledge of him,
EPH 1:18 – since the eyes of your heart have been enlightened – so that you may know what is the hope of his calling, what is the wealth of his glorious inheritance in the saints,
EPH 1:19 and what is the incomparable greatness of his power toward us who believe, as displayed in the exercise of his immense strength.
EPH 1:20 This power he exercised in Christ when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms
EPH 1:21 far above every rule and authority and power and dominion and every name that is named, not only in this age but also in the one to come.
EPH 1:22 And God put all things under Christ’s feet, and he gave him to the church as head over all things.
EPH 1:23 Now the church is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all.
EPH 2:1 And although you were dead in your transgressions and sins,
EPH 2:2 in which you formerly lived according to this world’s present path, according to the ruler of the kingdom of the air, the ruler of the spirit that is now energizing the sons of disobedience,
EPH 2:3 among whom all of us also formerly lived out our lives in the cravings of our flesh, indulging the desires of the flesh and the mind, and were by nature children of wrath even as the rest…
EPH 2:4 But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us,
EPH 2:5 even though we were dead in transgressions, made us alive together with Christ – by grace you are saved! –
EPH 2:6 and he raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,
EPH 2:7 to demonstrate in the coming ages the surpassing wealth of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
EPH 2:8 For by grace you are saved through faith, and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God;
EPH 2:9 it is not from works, so that no one can boast.
EPH 2:10 For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works that God prepared beforehand so we may do them.
EPH 2:11 Therefore remember that formerly you, the Gentiles in the flesh – who are called “uncircumcision” by the so-called “circumcision” that is performed on the body by human hands –
EPH 2:12 that you were at that time without the Messiah, alienated from the citizenship of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
EPH 2:13 But now in Christ Jesus you who used to be far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ.
EPH 2:14 For he is our peace, the one who made both groups into one and who destroyed the middle wall of partition, the hostility,
EPH 2:15 when he nullified in his flesh the law of commandments in decrees. He did this to create in himself one new man out of two, thus making peace,
EPH 2:16 and to reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, by which the hostility has been killed.
EPH 2:17 And he came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near,
EPH 2:18 so that through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father.
EPH 2:19 So then you are no longer foreigners and noncitizens, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of God’s household,
EPH 2:20 because you have been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the cornerstone.
EPH 2:21 In him the whole building, being joined together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord,
EPH 2:22 in whom you also are being built together into a dwelling place of God in the Spirit.
EPH 3:1 For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles –
EPH 3:2 if indeed you have heard of the stewardship of God’s grace that was given to me for you,
EPH 3:3 that by revelation the divine secret was made known to me, as I wrote before briefly.
EPH 3:4 When reading this, you will be able to understand my insight into this secret of Christ.
EPH 3:5 Now this secret was not disclosed to people in former generations as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit,
EPH 3:6 namely, that through the gospel the Gentiles are fellow heirs, fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus.
EPH 3:7 I became a servant of this gospel according to the gift of God’s grace that was given to me by the exercise of his power.
EPH 3:8 To me – less than the least of all the saints – this grace was given, to proclaim to the Gentiles the unfathomable riches of Christ
EPH 3:9 and to enlighten everyone about God’s secret plan – a secret that has been hidden for ages in God who has created all things.
EPH 3:10 The purpose of this enlightenment is that through the church the multifaceted wisdom of God should now be disclosed to the rulers and the authorities in the heavenly realms.
EPH 3:11 This was according to the eternal purpose that he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord,
EPH 3:12 in whom we have boldness and confident access to God because of Christ’s faithfulness.
EPH 3:13 For this reason I ask you not to lose heart because of what I am suffering for you, which is your glory.
EPH 3:14 For this reason I kneel before the Father,
EPH 3:15 from whom every family in heaven and on the earth is named.
EPH 3:16 I pray that according to the wealth of his glory he may grant you to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inner person,
EPH 3:17 that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith, so that, because you have been rooted and grounded in love,
EPH 3:18 you may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
EPH 3:19 and thus to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, so that you may be filled up to all the fullness of God.
EPH 3:20 Now to him who by the power that is working within us is able to do far beyond all that we ask or think,
EPH 3:21 to him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever. Amen.
EPH 4:1 I, therefore, the prisoner for the Lord, urge you to live worthily of the calling with which you have been called,
EPH 4:2 with all humility and gentleness, with patience, bearing with one another in love,
EPH 4:3 making every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
EPH 4:4 There is one body and one Spirit, just as you too were called to the one hope of your calling,
EPH 4:5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
EPH 4:6 one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
EPH 4:7 But to each one of us grace was given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
EPH 4:8 Therefore it says, “ When he ascended on high he captured captives; he gave gifts to men.”
EPH 4:9 Now what is the meaning of “ he ascended,” except that he also descended to the lower regions, namely, the earth?
EPH 4:10 He, the very one who descended, is also the one who ascended above all the heavens, in order to fill all things.
EPH 4:11 It was he who gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as evangelists, and some as pastors and teachers,
EPH 4:12 to equip the saints for the work of ministry, that is, to build up the body of Christ,
EPH 4:13 until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God – a mature person, attaining to the measure of Christ’s full stature.
EPH 4:14 So we are no longer to be children, tossed back and forth by waves and carried about by every wind of teaching by the trickery of people who craftily carry out their deceitful schemes.
EPH 4:15 But practicing the truth in love, we will in all things grow up into Christ, who is the head.
EPH 4:16 From him the whole body grows, fitted and held together through every supporting ligament. As each one does its part, the body grows in love.
EPH 4:17 So I say this, and insist in the Lord, that you no longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their thinking.
EPH 4:18 They are darkened in their understanding, being alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardness of their hearts.
EPH 4:19 Because they are callous, they have given themselves over to indecency for the practice of every kind of impurity with greediness.
EPH 4:20 But you did not learn about Christ like this,
EPH 4:21 if indeed you heard about him and were taught in him, just as the truth is in Jesus.
EPH 4:22 You were taught with reference to your former way of life to lay aside the old man who is being corrupted in accordance with deceitful desires,
EPH 4:23 to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
EPH 4:24 and to put on the new man who has been created in God’s image – in righteousness and holiness that comes from truth.
EPH 4:25 Therefore, having laid aside falsehood , each one of you speak the truth with his neighbor, for we are members of one another.
EPH 4:26 Be angry and do not sin; do not let the sun go down on the cause of your anger.
EPH 4:27 Do not give the devil an opportunity.
EPH 4:28 The one who steals must steal no longer; rather he must labor, doing good with his own hands, so that he may have something to share with the one who has need.
EPH 4:29 You must let no unwholesome word come out of your mouth, but only what is beneficial for the building up of the one in need, that it may give grace to those who hear.
EPH 4:30 And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
EPH 4:31 You must put away every kind of bitterness, anger, wrath, quarreling, and evil, slanderous talk.
EPH 4:32 Instead, be kind to one another, compassionate, forgiving one another, just as God in Christ also forgave you.
EPH 5:1 Therefore, be imitators of God as dearly loved children
EPH 5:2 and live in love, just as Christ also loved us and gave himself for us, a sacrificial and fragrant offering to God.
EPH 5:3 But among you there must not be either sexual immorality, impurity of any kind, or greed, as these are not fitting for the saints.
EPH 5:4 Neither should there be vulgar speech, foolish talk, or coarse jesting – all of which are out of character – but rather thanksgiving.
EPH 5:5 For you can be confident of this one thing: that no person who is immoral, impure, or greedy (such a person is an idolater) has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God.
EPH 5:6 Let nobody deceive you with empty words, for because of these things God’s wrath comes on the sons of disobedience.
EPH 5:7 Therefore do not be partakers with them,
EPH 5:8 for you were at one time darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of the light –
EPH 5:9 for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness, and truth –
EPH 5:10 trying to learn what is pleasing to the Lord.
EPH 5:11 Do not participate in the unfruitful deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.
EPH 5:12 For the things they do in secret are shameful even to mention.
EPH 5:13 But all things being exposed by the light are made evident.
EPH 5:14 For everything made evident is light, and for this reason it says: “Awake, O sleeper! Rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you!”
EPH 5:15 Therefore be very careful how you live – not as unwise but as wise,
EPH 5:16 taking advantage of every opportunity, because the days are evil.
EPH 5:17 For this reason do not be foolish, but be wise by understanding what the Lord’s will is.
EPH 5:18 And do not get drunk with wine, which is debauchery, but be filled by the Spirit,
EPH 5:19 speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making music in your hearts to the Lord,
EPH 5:20 always giving thanks to God the Father for each other in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
EPH 5:21 and submitting to one another out of reverence for Christ.
EPH 5:22 Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord,
EPH 5:23 because the husband is the head of the wife as also Christ is the head of the church – he himself being the savior of the body.
EPH 5:24 But as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
EPH 5:25 Husbands, love your wives just as Christ loved the church and gave himself for her
EPH 5:26 to sanctify her by cleansing her with the washing of the water by the word,
EPH 5:27 so that he may present the church to himself as glorious – not having a stain or wrinkle, or any such blemish, but holy and blameless.
EPH 5:28 In the same way husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.
EPH 5:29 For no one has ever hated his own body but he feeds it and takes care of it, just as Christ also does the church,
EPH 5:30 for we are members of his body.
EPH 5:31 For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and will be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.
EPH 5:32 This mystery is great – but I am actually speaking with reference to Christ and the church.
EPH 5:33 Nevertheless, each one of you must also love his own wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.
EPH 6:1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord for this is right.
EPH 6:2 “ Honor your father and mother,,*” which is the first commandment accompanied by a promise, namely,
EPH 6:3 “ that it may go well with you and that you will live a long time on the earth.”
EPH 6:4 Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but raise them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
EPH 6:5 Slaves, obey your human masters with fear and trembling, in the sincerity of your heart as to Christ,
EPH 6:6 not like those who do their work only when someone is watching – as people-pleasers – but as slaves of Christ doing the will of God from the heart.
EPH 6:7 Obey with enthusiasm, as though serving the Lord and not people,
EPH 6:8 because you know that each person, whether slave or free, if he does something good, this will be rewarded by the Lord.
EPH 6:9 Masters, treat your slaves the same way, giving up the use of threats, because you know that both you and they have the same master in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.
EPH 6:10 Finally, be strengthened in the Lord and in the strength of his power.
EPH 6:11 Clothe yourselves with the full armor of God so that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil.
EPH 6:12 For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the powers, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavens.
EPH 6:13 For this reason, take up the full armor of God so that you may be able to stand your ground on the evil day, and having done everything, to stand.
EPH 6:14 Stand firm therefore, by fastening the belt of truth around your waist, by putting on the breastplate of righteousness,
EPH 6:15 by fitting your feet with the preparation that comes from the good news of peace,
EPH 6:16 and in all of this, by taking up the shield of faith with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
EPH 6:17 And take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
EPH 6:18 With every prayer and petition, pray at all times in the Spirit, and to this end be alert, with all perseverance and requests for all the saints.
EPH 6:19 Pray for me also, that I may be given the message when I begin to speak – that I may confidently make known the mystery of the gospel,
EPH 6:20 for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may be able to speak boldly as I ought to speak.
EPH 6:21 Tychicus, my dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make everything known to you, so that you too may know about my circumstances, how I am doing.
EPH 6:22 I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know our circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts.
EPH 6:23 Peace to the brothers and sisters, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH 6:24 Grace be with all of those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.
PHI 1:1 From Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers and deacons.
PHI 1:2 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
PHI 1:3 I thank my God every time I remember you.
PHI 1:4 I always pray with joy in my every prayer for all of you
PHI 1:5 because of your participation in the gospel from the first day until now.
PHI 1:6 For I am sure of this very thing, that the one who began a good work in you will perfect it until the day of Christ Jesus.
PHI 1:7 For it is right for me to think this about all of you, because I have you in my heart, since both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel all of you became partners in God’s grace together with me.
PHI 1:8 For God is my witness that I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.
PHI 1:9 And I pray this, that your love may abound even more and more in knowledge and every kind of insight
PHI 1:10 so that you can decide what is best, and thus be sincere and blameless for the day of Christ,
PHI 1:11 filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God.
PHI 1:12 I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that my situation has actually turned out to advance the gospel:
PHI 1:13 The whole imperial guard and everyone else knows that I am in prison for the sake of Christ,
PHI 1:14 and most of the brothers and sisters, having confidence in the Lord because of my imprisonment, now more than ever dare to speak the word fearlessly.
PHI 1:15 Some, to be sure, are preaching Christ from envy and rivalry, but others from goodwill.
PHI 1:16 The latter do so from love because they know that I am placed here for the defense of the gospel.
PHI 1:17 The former proclaim Christ from selfish ambition, not sincerely, because they think they can cause trouble for me in my imprisonment.
PHI 1:18 What is the result? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed, and in this I rejoice. Yes, and I will continue to rejoice,
PHI 1:19 for I know that this will turn out for my deliverance through your prayers and the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
PHI 1:20 My confident hope is that I will in no way be ashamed but that with complete boldness, even now as always, Christ will be exalted in my body, whether I live or die.
PHI 1:21 For to me, living is Christ and dying is gain.
PHI 1:22 Now if I am to go on living in the body, this will mean productive work for me, yet I don’t know which I prefer:
PHI 1:23 I feel torn between the two, because I have a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is better by far,
PHI 1:24 but it is more vital for your sake that I remain in the body.
PHI 1:25 And since I am sure of this, I know that I will remain and continue with all of you for the sake of your progress and joy in the faith,
PHI 1:26 so that what you can be proud of may increase because of me in Christ Jesus, when I come back to you.
PHI 1:27 Only conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ so that – whether I come and see you or whether I remain absent – I should hear that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one mind, by contending side by side for the faith of the gospel,
PHI 1:28 and by not being intimidated in any way by your opponents. This is a sign of their destruction, but of your salvation – a sign which is from God.
PHI 1:29 For it has been granted to you not only to believe in Christ but also to suffer for him,
PHI 1:30 since you are encountering the same conflict that you saw me face and now hear that I am facing.
PHI 2:1 Therefore, if there is any encouragement in Christ, any comfort provided by love, any fellowship in the Spirit, any affection or mercy,
PHI 2:2 complete my joy and be of the same mind, by having the same love, being united in spirit, and having one purpose.
PHI 2:3 Instead of being motivated by selfish ambition or vanity, each of you should, in humility, be moved to treat one another as more important than yourself.
PHI 2:4 Each of you should be concerned not only about your own interests, but about the interests of others as well.
PHI 2:5 You should have the same attitude toward one another that Christ Jesus had,
PHI 2:6 who though he existed in the form of God did not regard equality with God as something to be grasped,
PHI 2:7 but emptied himself by taking on the form of a slave, by looking like other men, and by sharing in human nature.
PHI 2:8 He humbled himself, by becoming obedient to the point of death – even death on a cross!
PHI 2:9 As a result God exalted him and gave him the name that is above every name,
PHI 2:10 so that at the name of Jesus every knee will bow – in heaven and on earth and under the earth –
PHI 2:11 and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
PHI 2:12 So then, my dear friends, just as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence but even more in my absence, continue working out your salvation with awe and reverence,
PHI 2:13 for the one bringing forth in you both the desire and the effort – for the sake of his good pleasure – is God.
PHI 2:14 Do everything without grumbling or arguing,
PHI 2:15 so that you may be blameless and pure, children of God without blemish though you live in a crooked and perverse society, in which you shine as lights in the world
PHI 2:16 by holding on to the word of life so that on the day of Christ I will have a reason to boast that I did not run in vain nor labor in vain.
PHI 2:17 But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice together with all of you.
PHI 2:18 And in the same way you also should be glad and rejoice together with me.
PHI 2:19 Now I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I too may be encouraged by hearing news about you.
PHI 2:20 For there is no one here like him who will readily demonstrate his deep concern for you.
PHI 2:21 Others are busy with their own concerns, not those of Jesus Christ.
PHI 2:22 But you know his qualifications, that like a son working with his father, he served with me in advancing the gospel.
PHI 2:23 So I hope to send him as soon as I know more about my situation,
PHI 2:24 though I am confident in the Lord that I too will be coming to see you soon.
PHI 2:25 But for now I have considered it necessary to send Epaphroditus to you. For he is my brother, coworker and fellow soldier, and your messenger and minister to me in my need.
PHI 2:26 Indeed, he greatly missed all of you and was distressed because you heard that he had been ill.
PHI 2:27 In fact he became so ill that he nearly died. But God showed mercy to him – and not to him only, but also to me – so that I would not have grief on top of grief.
PHI 2:28 Therefore I am all the more eager to send him, so that when you see him again you can rejoice and I can be free from anxiety.
PHI 2:29 So welcome him in the Lord with great joy, and honor people like him,
PHI 2:30 since it was because of the work of Christ that he almost died. He risked his life so that he could make up for your inability to serve me.
PHI 3:1 Finally, my brothers and sisters, rejoice in the Lord! To write this again is no trouble to me, and it is a safeguard for you.
PHI 3:2 Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workers, beware of those who mutilate the flesh!
PHI 3:3 For we are the circumcision, the ones who worship by the Spirit of God, exult in Christ Jesus, and do not rely on human credentials
PHI 3:4 – though mine too are significant. If someone thinks he has good reasons to put confidence in human credentials, I have more:
PHI 3:5 I was circumcised on the eighth day, from the people of Israel and the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews. I lived according to the law as a Pharisee.
PHI 3:6 In my zeal for God I persecuted the church. According to the righteousness stipulated in the law I was blameless.
PHI 3:7 But these assets I have come to regard as liabilities because of Christ.
PHI 3:8 More than that, I now regard all things as liabilities compared to the far greater value of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things – indeed, I regard them as dung! – that I may gain Christ,
PHI 3:9 and be found in him, not because I have my own righteousness derived from the law, but because I have the righteousness that comes by way of Christ’s faithfulness – a righteousness from God that is in fact based on Christ’s faithfulness.
PHI 3:10 My aim is to know him, to experience the power of his resurrection, to share in his sufferings, and to be like him in his death,
PHI 3:11 and so, somehow, to attain to the resurrection from the dead.
PHI 3:12 Not that I have already attained this – that is, I have not already been perfected – but I strive to lay hold of that for which Christ Jesus also laid hold of me.
PHI 3:13 Brothers and sisters, I do not consider myself to have attained this. Instead I am single-minded: Forgetting the things that are behind and reaching out for the things that are ahead,
PHI 3:14 with this goal in mind, I strive toward the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.
PHI 3:15 Therefore let those of us who are “perfect” embrace this point of view. If you think otherwise, God will reveal to you the error of your ways.
PHI 3:16 Nevertheless, let us live up to the standard that we have already attained.
PHI 3:17 Be imitators of me, brothers and sisters, and watch carefully those who are living this way, just as you have us as an example.
PHI 3:18 For many live, about whom I have often told you, and now, with tears, I tell you that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.
PHI 3:19 Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, they exult in their shame, and they think about earthly things.
PHI 3:20 But our citizenship is in heaven – and we also await a savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
PHI 3:21 who will transform these humble bodies of ours into the likeness of his glorious body by means of that power by which he is able to subject all things to himself.
PHI 4:1 So then, my brothers and sisters, dear friends whom I long to see, my joy and crown, stand in the Lord in this way, my dear friends!
PHI 4:2 I appeal to Euodia and to Syntyche to agree in the Lord.
PHI 4:3 Yes, I say also to you, true companion, help them. They have struggled together in the gospel ministry along with me and Clement and my other coworkers, whose names are in the book of life.
PHI 4:4 Rejoice in the Lord always. Again I say, rejoice!
PHI 4:5 Let everyone see your gentleness. The Lord is near!
PHI 4:6 Do not be anxious about anything. Instead, in every situation, through prayer and petition with thanksgiving, tell your requests to God.
PHI 4:7 And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
PHI 4:8 Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is worthy of respect, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if something is excellent or praiseworthy, think about these things.
PHI 4:9 And what you learned and received and heard and saw in me, do these things. And the God of peace will be with you.
PHI 4:10 I have great joy in the Lord because now at last you have again expressed your concern for me. (Now I know you were concerned before but had no opportunity to do anything.)
PHI 4:11 I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content in any circumstance.
PHI 4:12 I have experienced times of need and times of abundance. In any and every circumstance I have learned the secret of contentment, whether I go satisfied or hungry, have plenty or nothing.
PHI 4:13 I am able to do all things through the one who strengthens me.
PHI 4:14 Nevertheless, you did well to share with me in my trouble.
PHI 4:15 And as you Philippians know, at the beginning of my gospel ministry, when I left Macedonia, no church shared with me in this matter of giving and receiving except you alone.
PHI 4:16 For even in Thessalonica on more than one occasion you sent something for my need.
PHI 4:17 I do not say this because I am seeking a gift. Rather, I seek the credit that abounds to your account.
PHI 4:18 For I have received everything, and I have plenty. I have all I need because I received from Epaphroditus what you sent – a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, very pleasing to God.
PHI 4:19 And my God will supply your every need according to his glorious riches in Christ Jesus.
PHI 4:20 May glory be given to God our Father forever and ever. Amen.
PHI 4:21 Give greetings to all the saints in Christ Jesus. The brothers with me here send greetings.
PHI 4:22 All the saints greet you, especially those who belong to Caesar’s household.
PHI 4:23 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
COL 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
COL 1:2 to the saints, the faithful brothers and sisters in Christ, at Colossae. Grace and peace to you from God our Father!
COL 1:3 We always give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
COL 1:4 since we heard about your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you have for all the saints.
COL 1:5 Your faith and love have arisen from the hope laid up for you in heaven, which you have heard about in the message of truth, the gospel
COL 1:6 that has come to you. Just as in the entire world this gospel is bearing fruit and growing, so it has also been bearing fruit and growing among you from the first day you heard it and understood the grace of God in truth.
COL 1:7 You learned the gospel from Epaphras, our dear fellow slave – a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf –
COL 1:8 who also told us of your love in the Spirit.
COL 1:9 For this reason we also, from the day we heard about you, have not ceased praying for you and asking God to fill you with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
COL 1:10 so that you may live worthily of the Lord and please him in all respects – bearing fruit in every good deed, growing in the knowledge of God,
COL 1:11 being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might for the display of all patience and steadfastness, joyfully
COL 1:12 giving thanks to the Father who has qualified you to share in the saints’ inheritance in the light.
COL 1:13 He delivered us from the power of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of the Son he loves,
COL 1:14 in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
COL 1:15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation,
COL 1:16 for all things in heaven and on earth were created by him – all things, whether visible or invisible, whether thrones or dominions, whether principalities or powers – all things were created through him and for him.
COL 1:17 He himself is before all things and all things are held together in him.
COL 1:18 He is the head of the body, the church, as well as the beginning, the firstborn from among the dead, so that he himself may become first in all things.
COL 1:19 For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in the Son
COL 1:20 and through him to reconcile all things to himself by making peace through the blood of his cross – through him, whether things on earth or things in heaven.
COL 1:21 And you were at one time strangers and enemies in your minds as expressed through your evil deeds,
COL 1:22 but now he has reconciled you by his physical body through death to present you holy, without blemish, and blameless before him –
COL 1:23 if indeed you remain in the faith, established and firm, without shifting from the hope of the gospel that you heard. This gospel has also been preached in all creation under heaven, and I, Paul, have become its servant.
COL 1:24 Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and I fill up in my physical body – for the sake of his body, the church – what is lacking in the sufferings of Christ.
COL 1:25 I became a servant of the church according to the stewardship from God – given to me for you – in order to complete the word of God,
COL 1:26 that is, the mystery that has been kept hidden from ages and generations, but has now been revealed to his saints.
COL 1:27 God wanted to make known to them the glorious riches of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
COL 1:28 We proclaim him by instructing and teaching all people with all wisdom so that we may present every person mature in Christ.
COL 1:29 Toward this goal I also labor, struggling according to his power that powerfully works in me.
COL 2:1 For I want you to know how great a struggle I have for you, and for those in Laodicea, and for those who have not met me face to face.
COL 2:2 My goal is that their hearts, having been knit together in love, may be encouraged, and that they may have all the riches that assurance brings in their understanding of the knowledge of the mystery of God, namely, Christ,
COL 2:3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
COL 2:4 I say this so that no one will deceive you through arguments that sound reasonable.
COL 2:5 For though I am absent from you in body, I am present with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your morale and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
COL 2:6 Therefore, just as you received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to live your lives in him,
COL 2:7 rooted and built up in him and firm in your faith just as you were taught, and overflowing with thankfulness.
COL 2:8 Be careful not to allow anyone to captivate you through an empty, deceitful philosophy that is according to human traditions and the elemental spirits of the world, and not according to Christ.
COL 2:9 For in him all the fullness of deity lives in bodily form,
COL 2:10 and you have been filled in him, who is the head over every ruler and authority.
COL 2:11 In him you also were circumcised – not, however, with a circumcision performed by human hands, but by the removal of the fleshly body, that is, through the circumcision done by Christ.
COL 2:12 Having been buried with him in baptism, you also have been raised with him through your faith in the power of God who raised him from the dead.
COL 2:13 And even though you were dead in your transgressions and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he nevertheless made you alive with him, having forgiven all your transgressions.
COL 2:14 He has destroyed what was against us, a certificate of indebtedness expressed in decrees opposed to us. He has taken it away by nailing it to the cross.
COL 2:15 Disarming the rulers and authorities, he has made a public disgrace of them, triumphing over them by the cross.
COL 2:16 Therefore do not let anyone judge you with respect to food or drink, or in the matter of a feast, new moon, or Sabbath days –
COL 2:17 these are only the shadow of the things to come, but the reality is Christ!
COL 2:18 Let no one who delights in humility and the worship of angels pass judgment on you. That person goes on at great lengths about what he has supposedly seen, but he is puffed up with empty notions by his fleshly mind.
COL 2:19 He has not held fast to the head from whom the whole body, supported and knit together through its ligaments and sinews, grows with a growth that is from God.
COL 2:20 If you have died with Christ to the elemental spirits of the world, why do you submit to them as though you lived in the world?
COL 2:21 “Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not touch!”
COL 2:22 These are all destined to perish with use, founded as they are on human commands and teachings.
COL 2:23 Even though they have the appearance of wisdom with their self-imposed worship and false humility achieved by an unsparing treatment of the body – a wisdom with no true value – they in reality result in fleshly indulgence.
COL 3:1 Therefore, if you have been raised with Christ, keep seeking the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.
COL 3:2 Keep thinking about things above, not things on the earth,
COL 3:3 for you have died and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
COL 3:4 When Christ (who is your life) appears, then you too will be revealed in glory with him.
COL 3:5 So put to death whatever in your nature belongs to the earth: sexual immorality, impurity, shameful passion, evil desire, and greed which is idolatry.
COL 3:6 Because of these things the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience.
COL 3:7 You also lived your lives in this way at one time, when you used to live among them.
COL 3:8 But now, put off all such things as anger, rage, malice, slander, abusive language from your mouth.
COL 3:9 Do not lie to one another since you have put off the old man with its practices
COL 3:10 and have been clothed with the new man that is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of the one who created it.
COL 3:11 Here there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all and in all.
COL 3:12 Therefore, as the elect of God, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with a heart of mercy, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
COL 3:13 bearing with one another and forgiving one another, if someone happens to have a complaint against anyone else. Just as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also forgive others.
COL 3:14 And to all these virtues add love, which is the perfect bond.
COL 3:15 Let the peace of Christ be in control in your heart (for you were in fact called as one body to this peace), and be thankful.
COL 3:16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and exhorting one another with all wisdom, singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, all with grace in your hearts to God.
COL 3:17 And whatever you do in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.
COL 3:18 Wives, submit to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
COL 3:19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be embittered against them.
COL 3:20 Children, obey your parents in everything, for this is pleasing in the Lord.
COL 3:21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, so they will not become disheartened.
COL 3:22 Slaves, obey your earthly masters in every respect, not only when they are watching – like those who are strictly people-pleasers – but with a sincere heart, fearing the Lord.
COL 3:23 Whatever you are doing, work at it with enthusiasm, as to the Lord and not for people,
COL 3:24 because you know that you will receive your inheritance from the Lord as the reward. Serve the Lord Christ.
COL 3:25 For the one who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there are no exceptions.
COL 4:1 Masters, treat your slaves with justice and fairness, because you know that you also have a master in heaven.
COL 4:2 Be devoted to prayer, keeping alert in it with thanksgiving.
COL 4:3 At the same time pray for us too, that God may open a door for the message so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains.
COL 4:4 Pray that I may make it known as I should.
COL 4:5 Conduct yourselves with wisdom toward outsiders, making the most of the opportunities.
COL 4:6 Let your speech always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you should answer everyone.
COL 4:7 Tychicus, a dear brother, faithful minister, and fellow slave in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me.
COL 4:8 I sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are doing and that he may encourage your hearts.
COL 4:9 I sent him with Onesimus, the faithful and dear brother, who is one of you. They will tell you about everything here.
COL 4:10 Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, sends you greetings, as does Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you received instructions; if he comes to you, welcome him).
COL 4:11 And Jesus who is called Justus also sends greetings. In terms of Jewish converts, these are the only fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me.
COL 4:12 Epaphras, who is one of you and a slave of Christ, greets you. He is always struggling in prayer on your behalf, so that you may stand mature and fully assured in all the will of God.
COL 4:13 For I can testify that he has worked hard for you and for those in Laodicea and Hierapolis.
COL 4:14 Our dear friend Luke the physician and Demas greet you.
COL 4:15 Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters who are in Laodicea and to Nympha and the church that meets in her house.
COL 4:16 And after you have read this letter, have it read to the church of Laodicea. In turn, read the letter from Laodicea as well.
COL 4:17 And tell Archippus, “See to it that you complete the ministry you received in the Lord.”
COL 4:18 I, Paul, write this greeting by my own hand. Remember my chains. Grace be with you.
1TH 1:1 From Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace and peace to you!
1TH 1:2 We thank God always for all of you as we mention you constantly in our prayers,
1TH 1:3 because we recall in the presence of our God and Father your work of faith and labor of love and endurance of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH 1:4 We know, brothers and sisters loved by God, that he has chosen you,
1TH 1:5 in that our gospel did not come to you merely in words, but in power and in the Holy Spirit and with deep conviction (surely you recall the character we displayed when we came among you to help you).
1TH 1:6 And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, when you received the message with joy that comes from the Holy Spirit, despite great affliction.
1TH 1:7 As a result you became an example to all the believers in Macedonia and in Achaia.
1TH 1:8 For from you the message of the Lord has echoed forth not just in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place reports of your faith in God have spread, so that we do not need to say anything.
1TH 1:9 For people everywhere report how you welcomed us and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God
1TH 1:10 and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus our deliverer from the coming wrath.
1TH 2:1 For you yourselves know, brothers and sisters, about our coming to you – it has not proven to be purposeless.
1TH 2:2 But although we suffered earlier and were mistreated in Philippi, as you know, we had the courage in our God to declare to you the gospel of God in spite of much opposition.
1TH 2:3 For the appeal we make does not come from error or impurity or with deceit,
1TH 2:4 but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we declare it, not to please people but God, who examines our hearts.
1TH 2:5 For we never appeared with flattering speech, as you know, nor with a pretext for greed – God is our witness –
1TH 2:6 nor to seek glory from people, either from you or from others,
1TH 2:7 although we could have imposed our weight as apostles of Christ; instead we became little children among you. Like a nursing mother caring for her own children,
1TH 2:8 with such affection for you we were happy to share with you not only the gospel of God but also our own lives, because you had become dear to us.
1TH 2:9 For you recall, brothers and sisters, our toil and drudgery: By working night and day so as not to impose a burden on any of you, we preached to you the gospel of God.
1TH 2:10 You are witnesses, and so is God, as to how holy and righteous and blameless our conduct was toward you who believe.
1TH 2:11 As you know, we treated each one of you as a father treats his own children,
1TH 2:12 exhorting and encouraging you and insisting that you live in a way worthy of God who calls you to his own kingdom and his glory.
1TH 2:13 And so we too constantly thank God that when you received God’s message that you heard from us, you accepted it not as a human message, but as it truly is, God’s message, which is at work among you who believe.
1TH 2:14 For you became imitators, brothers and sisters, of God’s churches in Christ Jesus that are in Judea, because you too suffered the same things from your own countrymen as they in fact did from the Jews,
1TH 2:15 who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets and persecuted us severely. They are displeasing to God and are opposed to all people,
1TH 2:16 because they hinder us from speaking to the Gentiles so that they may be saved. Thus they constantly fill up their measure of sins, but wrath has come upon them completely.
1TH 2:17 But when we were separated from you, brothers and sisters, for a short time (in presence, not in affection) we became all the more fervent in our great desire to see you in person.
1TH 2:18 For we wanted to come to you (I, Paul, in fact tried again and again) but Satan thwarted us.
1TH 2:19 For who is our hope or joy or crown to boast of before our Lord Jesus at his coming? Is it not of course you?
1TH 2:20 For you are our glory and joy!
1TH 3:1 So when we could bear it no longer, we decided to stay on in Athens alone.
1TH 3:2 We sent Timothy, our brother and fellow worker for God in the gospel of Christ, to strengthen you and encourage you about your faith,
1TH 3:3 so that no one would be shaken by these afflictions. For you yourselves know that we are destined for this.
1TH 3:4 For in fact when we were with you, we were telling you in advance that we would suffer affliction, and so it has happened, as you well know.
1TH 3:5 So when I could bear it no longer, I sent to find out about your faith, for fear that the tempter somehow tempted you and our toil had proven useless.
1TH 3:6 But now Timothy has come to us from you and given us the good news of your faith and love and that you always think of us with affection and long to see us just as we also long to see you!
1TH 3:7 So in all our distress and affliction, we were reassured about you, brothers and sisters, through your faith.
1TH 3:8 For now we are alive again, if you stand firm in the Lord.
1TH 3:9 For how can we thank God enough for you, for all the joy we feel because of you before our God?
1TH 3:10 We pray earnestly night and day to see you in person and make up what may be lacking in your faith.
1TH 3:11 Now may God our Father himself and our Lord Jesus direct our way to you.
1TH 3:12 And may the Lord cause you to increase and abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you,
1TH 3:13 so that your hearts are strengthened in holiness to be blameless before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.
1TH 4:1 Finally then, brothers and sisters, we ask you and urge you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received instruction from us about how you must live and please God (as you are in fact living) that you do so more and more.
1TH 4:2 For you know what commands we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
1TH 4:3 For this is God’s will: that you become holy, that you keep away from sexual immorality,
1TH 4:4 that each of you know how to possess his own body in holiness and honor,
1TH 4:5 not in lustful passion like the Gentiles who do not know God.
1TH 4:6 In this matter no one should violate the rights of his brother or take advantage of him, because the Lord is the avenger in all these cases, as we also told you earlier and warned you solemnly.
1TH 4:7 For God did not call us to impurity but in holiness.
1TH 4:8 Consequently the one who rejects this is not rejecting human authority but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you.
1TH 4:9 Now on the topic of brotherly love you have no need for anyone to write you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another.
1TH 4:10 And indeed you are practicing it toward all the brothers and sisters in all of Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers and sisters, to do so more and more,
1TH 4:11 to aspire to lead a quiet life, to attend to your own business, and to work with your hands, as we commanded you.
1TH 4:12 In this way you will live a decent life before outsiders and not be in need.
1TH 4:13 Now we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers and sisters, about those who are asleep, so that you will not grieve like the rest who have no hope.
1TH 4:14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also we believe that God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep as Christians.
1TH 4:15 For we tell you this by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord, will surely not go ahead of those who have fallen asleep.
1TH 4:16 For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a shout of command, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first.
1TH 4:17 Then we who are alive, who are left, will be suddenly caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord.
1TH 4:18 Therefore encourage one another with these words.
1TH 5:1 Now on the topic of times and seasons, brothers and sisters, you have no need for anything to be written to you.
1TH 5:2 For you know quite well that the day of the Lord will come in the same way as a thief in the night.
1TH 5:3 Now when they are saying, “There is peace and security,” then sudden destruction comes on them, like labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will surely not escape.
1TH 5:4 But you, brothers and sisters, are not in the darkness for the day to overtake you like a thief would.
1TH 5:5 For you all are sons of the light and sons of the day. We are not of the night nor of the darkness.
1TH 5:6 So then we must not sleep as the rest, but must stay alert and sober.
1TH 5:7 For those who sleep, sleep at night and those who get drunk are drunk at night.
1TH 5:8 But since we are of the day, we must stay sober by putting on the breastplate of faith and love and as a helmet our hope for salvation.
1TH 5:9 For God did not destine us for wrath but for gaining salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH 5:10 He died for us so that whether we are alert or asleep we will come to life together with him.
1TH 5:11 Therefore encourage one another and build up each other, just as you are in fact doing.
1TH 5:12 Now we ask you, brothers and sisters, to acknowledge those who labor among you and preside over you in the Lord and admonish you,
1TH 5:13 and to esteem them most highly in love because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves.
1TH 5:14 And we urge you, brothers and sisters, admonish the undisciplined, comfort the discouraged, help the weak, be patient toward all.
1TH 5:15 See that no one pays back evil for evil to anyone, but always pursue what is good for one another and for all.
1TH 5:16 Always rejoice,
1TH 5:17 constantly pray,
1TH 5:18 in everything give thanks. For this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
1TH 5:19 Do not extinguish the Spirit.
1TH 5:20 Do not treat prophecies with contempt.
1TH 5:21 But examine all things; hold fast to what is good.
1TH 5:22 Stay away from every form of evil.
1TH 5:23 Now may the God of peace himself make you completely holy and may your spirit and soul and body be kept entirely blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH 5:24 He who calls you is trustworthy, and he will in fact do this.
1TH 5:25 Brothers and sisters, pray for us too.
1TH 5:26 Greet all the brothers and sisters with a holy kiss.
1TH 5:27 I call on you solemnly in the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers and sisters.
1TH 5:28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
2TH 1:1 From Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH 1:2 Grace and peace to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
2TH 1:3 We ought to thank God always for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith flourishes more and more and the love of each one of you all for one another is ever greater.
2TH 1:4 As a result we ourselves boast about you in the churches of God for your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and afflictions you are enduring.
2TH 1:5 This is evidence of God’s righteous judgment, to make you worthy of the kingdom of God, for which in fact you are suffering.
2TH 1:6 For it is right for God to repay with affliction those who afflict you,
2TH 1:7 and to you who are being afflicted to give rest together with us when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels.
2TH 1:8 With flaming fire he will mete out punishment on those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus.
2TH 1:9 They will undergo the penalty of eternal destruction, away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his strength,
2TH 1:10 when he comes to be glorified among his saints and admired on that day among all who have believed – and you did in fact believe our testimony.
2TH 1:11 And in this regard we pray for you always, that our God will make you worthy of his calling and fulfill by his power your every desire for goodness and every work of faith,
2TH 1:12 that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH 2:1 Now regarding the arrival of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to be with him, we ask you, brothers and sisters,
2TH 2:2 not to be easily shaken from your composure or disturbed by any kind of spirit or message or letter allegedly from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord is already here.
2TH 2:3 Let no one deceive you in any way. For that day will not arrive until the rebellion comes and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the son of destruction.
2TH 2:4 He opposes and exalts himself above every so-called god or object of worship, and as a result he takes his seat in God’s temple, displaying himself as God.
2TH 2:5 Surely you recall that I used to tell you these things while I was still with you.
2TH 2:6 And so you know what holds him back, so that he will be revealed in his own time.
2TH 2:7 For the hidden power of lawlessness is already at work. However, the one who holds him back will do so until he is taken out of the way,
2TH 2:8 and then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will destroy by the breath of his mouth and wipe out by the manifestation of his arrival.
2TH 2:9 The arrival of the lawless one will be by Satan’s working with all kinds of miracles and signs and false wonders,
2TH 2:10 and with every kind of evil deception directed against those who are perishing, because they found no place in their hearts for the truth so as to be saved.
2TH 2:11 Consequently God sends on them a deluding influence so that they will believe what is false.
2TH 2:12 And so all of them who have not believed the truth but have delighted in evil will be condemned.
2TH 2:13 But we ought to thank God always for you, brothers and sisters loved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation through sanctification by the Spirit and faith in the truth.
2TH 2:14 He called you to this salvation through our gospel, so that you may possess the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH 2:15 Therefore, brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold on to the traditions that we taught you, whether by speech or by letter.
2TH 2:16 Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and by grace gave us eternal comfort and good hope,
2TH 2:17 encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good thing you do or say.
2TH 3:1 Finally, pray for us, brothers and sisters, that the Lord’s message may spread quickly and be honored as in fact it was among you,
2TH 3:2 and that we may be delivered from perverse and evil people. For not all have faith.
2TH 3:3 But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one.
2TH 3:4 And we are confident about you in the Lord that you are both doing – and will do – what we are commanding.
2TH 3:5 Now may the Lord direct your hearts toward the love of God and the endurance of Christ.
2TH 3:6 But we command you, brothers and sisters, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from any brother who lives an undisciplined life and not according to the tradition they received from us.
2TH 3:7 For you know yourselves how you must imitate us, because we did not behave without discipline among you,
2TH 3:8 and we did not eat anyone’s food without paying. Instead, in toil and drudgery we worked night and day in order not to burden any of you.
2TH 3:9 It was not because we do not have that right, but to give ourselves as an example for you to imitate.
2TH 3:10 For even when we were with you, we used to give you this command: “If anyone is not willing to work, neither should he eat.”
2TH 3:11 For we hear that some among you are living an undisciplined life, not doing their own work but meddling in the work of others.
2TH 3:12 Now such people we command and urge in the Lord Jesus Christ to work quietly and so provide their own food to eat.
2TH 3:13 But you, brothers and sisters, do not grow weary in doing what is right.
2TH 3:14 But if anyone does not obey our message through this letter, take note of him and do not associate closely with him, so that he may be ashamed.
2TH 3:15 Yet do not regard him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
2TH 3:16 Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with you all.
2TH 3:17 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand, which is how I write in every letter.
2TH 3:18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
1TI 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope,
1TI 1:2 to Timothy, my genuine child in the faith. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord!
1TI 1:3 As I urged you when I was leaving for Macedonia, stay on in Ephesus to instruct certain people not to spread false teachings,
1TI 1:4 nor to occupy themselves with myths and interminable genealogies. Such things promote useless speculations rather than God’s redemptive plan that operates by faith.
1TI 1:5 But the aim of our instruction is love that comes from a pure heart, a good conscience, and a sincere faith.
1TI 1:6 Some have strayed from these and turned away to empty discussion.
1TI 1:7 They want to be teachers of the law, but they do not understand what they are saying or the things they insist on so confidently.
1TI 1:8 But we know that the law is good if someone uses it legitimately,
1TI 1:9 realizing that law is not intended for a righteous person, but for lawless and rebellious people, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
1TI 1:10 sexually immoral people, practicing homosexuals, kidnappers, liars, perjurers – in fact, for any who live contrary to sound teaching.
1TI 1:11 This accords with the glorious gospel of the blessed God that was entrusted to me.
1TI 1:12 I am grateful to the one who has strengthened me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he considered me faithful in putting me into ministry,
1TI 1:13 even though I was formerly a blasphemer and a persecutor, and an arrogant man. But I was treated with mercy because I acted ignorantly in unbelief,
1TI 1:14 and our Lord’s grace was abundant, bringing faith and love in Christ Jesus.
1TI 1:15 This saying is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance: “Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners” – and I am the worst of them!
1TI 1:16 But here is why I was treated with mercy: so that in me as the worst, Christ Jesus could demonstrate his utmost patience, as an example for those who are going to believe in him for eternal life.
1TI 1:17 Now to the eternal king, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever! Amen.
1TI 1:18 I put this charge before you, Timothy my child, in keeping with the prophecies once spoken about you, in order that with such encouragement you may fight the good fight.
1TI 1:19 To do this you must hold firmly to faith and a good conscience, which some have rejected and so have suffered shipwreck in regard to the faith.
1TI 1:20 Among these are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I handed over to Satan to be taught not to blaspheme.
1TI 2:1 First of all, then, I urge that requests, prayers, intercessions, and thanks be offered on behalf of all people,
1TI 2:2 even for kings and all who are in authority, that we may lead a peaceful and quiet life in all godliness and dignity.
1TI 2:3 Such prayer for all is good and welcomed before God our Savior,
1TI 2:4 since he wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth.
1TI 2:5 For there is one God and one intermediary between God and humanity, Christ Jesus, himself human,
1TI 2:6 who gave himself as a ransom for all, revealing God’s purpose at his appointed time.
1TI 2:7 For this I was appointed a preacher and apostle – I am telling the truth; I am not lying – and a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
1TI 2:8 So I want the men to pray in every place, lifting up holy hands without anger or dispute.
1TI 2:9 Likewise the women are to dress in suitable apparel, with modesty and self-control. Their adornment must not be with braided hair and gold or pearls or expensive clothing,
1TI 2:10 but with good deeds, as is proper for women who profess reverence for God.
1TI 2:11 A woman must learn quietly with all submissiveness.
1TI 2:12 But I do not allow a woman to teach or exercise authority over a man. She must remain quiet.
1TI 2:13 For Adam was formed first and then Eve.
1TI 2:14 And Adam was not deceived, but the woman, because she was fully deceived, fell into transgression.
1TI 2:15 But she will be delivered through childbearing, if she continues in faith and love and holiness with self-control.
1TI 3:1 This saying is trustworthy: “If someone aspires to the office of overseer, he desires a good work.”
1TI 3:2 The overseer then must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, an able teacher,
1TI 3:3 not a drunkard, not violent, but gentle, not contentious, free from the love of money.
1TI 3:4 He must manage his own household well and keep his children in control without losing his dignity.
1TI 3:5 But if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for the church of God?
1TI 3:6 He must not be a recent convert or he may become arrogant and fall into the punishment that the devil will exact.
1TI 3:7 And he must be well thought of by those outside the faith, so that he may not fall into disgrace and be caught by the devil’s trap.
1TI 3:8 Deacons likewise must be dignified, not two-faced, not given to excessive drinking, not greedy for gain,
1TI 3:9 holding to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience.
1TI 3:10 And these also must be tested first and then let them serve as deacons if they are found blameless.
1TI 3:11 Likewise also their wives must be dignified, not slanderous, temperate, faithful in every respect.
1TI 3:12 Deacons must be husbands of one wife and good managers of their children and their own households.
1TI 3:13 For those who have served well as deacons gain a good standing for themselves and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
1TI 3:14 I hope to come to you soon, but I am writing these instructions to you
1TI 3:15 in case I am delayed, to let you know how people ought to conduct themselves in the household of God, because it is the church of the living God, the support and bulwark of the truth.
1TI 3:16 And we all agree, our religion contains amazing revelation: He was revealed in the flesh, vindicated by the Spirit, seen by angels, proclaimed among Gentiles, believed on in the world, taken up in glory.
1TI 4:1 Now the Spirit explicitly says that in the later times some will desert the faith and occupy themselves with deceiving spirits and demonic teachings,
1TI 4:2 influenced by the hypocrisy of liars whose consciences are seared.
1TI 4:3 They will prohibit marriage and require abstinence from foods that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.
1TI 4:4 For every creation of God is good and no food is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving.
1TI 4:5 For it is sanctified by God’s word and by prayer.
1TI 4:6 By pointing out such things to the brothers and sisters, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, having nourished yourself on the words of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed.
1TI 4:7 But reject those myths fit only for the godless and gullible, and train yourself for godliness.
1TI 4:8 For “physical exercise has some value, but godliness is valuable in every way. It holds promise for the present life and for the life to come.”
1TI 4:9 This saying is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance.
1TI 4:10 In fact this is why we work hard and struggle, because we have set our hope on the living God, who is the Savior of all people, especially of believers.
1TI 4:11 Command and teach these things.
1TI 4:12 Let no one look down on you because you are young, but set an example for the believers in your speech, conduct, love, faithfulness, and purity.
1TI 4:13 Until I come, give attention to the public reading of scripture, to exhortation, to teaching.
1TI 4:14 Do not neglect the spiritual gift you have, given to you and confirmed by prophetic words when the elders laid hands on you.
1TI 4:15 Take pains with these things; be absorbed in them, so that everyone will see your progress.
1TI 4:16 Be conscientious about how you live and what you teach. Persevere in this, because by doing so you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
1TI 5:1 Do not address an older man harshly but appeal to him as a father. Speak to younger men as brothers,
1TI 5:2 older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters – with complete purity.
1TI 5:3 Honor widows who are truly in need.
1TI 5:4 But if a widow has children or grandchildren, they should first learn to fulfill their duty toward their own household and so repay their parents what is owed them. For this is what pleases God.
1TI 5:5 But the widow who is truly in need, and completely on her own, has set her hope on God and continues in her pleas and prayers night and day.
1TI 5:6 But the one who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives.
1TI 5:7 Reinforce these commands, so that they will be beyond reproach.
1TI 5:8 But if someone does not provide for his own, especially his own family, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
1TI 5:9 No widow should be put on the list unless she is at least sixty years old, was the wife of one husband,
1TI 5:10 and has a reputation for good works: as one who has raised children, practiced hospitality, washed the feet of the saints, helped those in distress – as one who has exhibited all kinds of good works.
1TI 5:11 But do not accept younger widows on the list, because their passions may lead them away from Christ and they will desire to marry,
1TI 5:12 and so incur judgment for breaking their former pledge.
1TI 5:13 And besides that, going around from house to house they learn to be lazy, and they are not only lazy, but also gossips and busybodies, talking about things they should not.
1TI 5:14 So I want younger women to marry, raise children, and manage a household, in order to give the adversary no opportunity to vilify us.
1TI 5:15 For some have already wandered away to follow Satan.
1TI 5:16 If a believing woman has widows in her family, let her help them. The church should not be burdened, so that it may help the widows who are truly in need.
1TI 5:17 Elders who provide effective leadership must be counted worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching.
1TI 5:18 For the scripture says, “ Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and, “The worker deserves his pay.”
1TI 5:19 Do not accept an accusation against an elder unless it can be confirmed by two or three witnesses.
1TI 5:20 Those guilty of sin must be rebuked before all, as a warning to the rest.
1TI 5:21 Before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels, I solemnly charge you to carry out these commands without prejudice or favoritism of any kind.
1TI 5:22 Do not lay hands on anyone hastily and so identify with the sins of others. Keep yourself pure.
1TI 5:23 (Stop drinking just water, but use a little wine for your digestion and your frequent illnesses.)
1TI 5:24 The sins of some people are obvious, going before them into judgment, but for others, they show up later.
1TI 5:25 Similarly good works are also obvious, and the ones that are not cannot remain hidden.
1TI 6:1 Those who are under the yoke as slaves must regard their own masters as deserving of full respect. This will prevent the name of God and Christian teaching from being discredited.
1TI 6:2 But those who have believing masters must not show them less respect because they are brothers. Instead they are to serve all the more, because those who benefit from their service are believers and dearly loved. Teach them and exhort them about these things.
1TI 6:3 If someone spreads false teachings and does not agree with sound words (that is, those of our Lord Jesus Christ) and with the teaching that accords with godliness,
1TI 6:4 he is conceited and understands nothing, but has an unhealthy interest in controversies and verbal disputes. This gives rise to envy, dissension, slanders, evil suspicions,
1TI 6:5 and constant bickering by people corrupted in their minds and deprived of the truth, who suppose that godliness is a way of making a profit.
1TI 6:6 Now godliness combined with contentment brings great profit.
1TI 6:7 For we have brought nothing into this world and so we cannot take a single thing out either.
1TI 6:8 But if we have food and shelter, we will be satisfied with that.
1TI 6:9 Those who long to be rich, however, stumble into temptation and a trap and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction.
1TI 6:10 For the love of money is the root of all evils. Some people in reaching for it have strayed from the faith and stabbed themselves with many pains.
1TI 6:11 But you, as a person dedicated to God, keep away from all that. Instead pursue righteousness, godliness, faithfulness, love, endurance, and gentleness.
1TI 6:12 Compete well for the faith and lay hold of that eternal life you were called for and made your good confession for in the presence of many witnesses.
1TI 6:13 I charge you before God who gives life to all things and Christ Jesus who made his good confession before Pontius Pilate,
1TI 6:14 to obey this command without fault or failure until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ
1TI 6:15 – whose appearing the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords, will reveal at the right time.
1TI 6:16 He alone possesses immortality and lives in unapproachable light, whom no human has ever seen or is able to see. To him be honor and eternal power! Amen.
1TI 6:17 Command those who are rich in this world’s goods not to be haughty or to set their hope on riches, which are uncertain, but on God who richly provides us with all things for our enjoyment.
1TI 6:18 Tell them to do good, to be rich in good deeds, to be generous givers, sharing with others.
1TI 6:19 In this way they will save up a treasure for themselves as a firm foundation for the future and so lay hold of what is truly life.
1TI 6:20 O Timothy, protect what has been entrusted to you. Avoid the profane chatter and absurdities of so-called “knowledge.”
1TI 6:21 By professing it, some have strayed from the faith. Grace be with you all.
2TI 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to further the promise of life in Christ Jesus,
2TI 1:2 to Timothy, my dear child. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord!
2TI 1:3 I am thankful to God, whom I have served with a clear conscience as my ancestors did, when I remember you in my prayers as I do constantly night and day.
2TI 1:4 As I remember your tears, I long to see you, so that I may be filled with joy.
2TI 1:5 I recall your sincere faith that was alive first in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice, and I am sure is in you.
2TI 1:6 Because of this I remind you to rekindle God’s gift that you possess through the laying on of my hands.
2TI 1:7 For God did not give us a Spirit of fear but of power and love and self-control.
2TI 1:8 So do not be ashamed of the testimony about our Lord or of me, a prisoner for his sake, but by God’s power accept your share of suffering for the gospel.
2TI 1:9 He is the one who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not based on our works but on his own purpose and grace, granted to us in Christ Jesus before time began,
2TI 1:10 but now made visible through the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus. He has broken the power of death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel!
2TI 1:11 For this gospel I was appointed a preacher and apostle and teacher.
2TI 1:12 Because of this, in fact, I suffer as I do. But I am not ashamed, because I know the one in whom my faith is set and I am convinced that he is able to protect what has been entrusted to me until that day.
2TI 1:13 Hold to the standard of sound words that you heard from me and do so with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
2TI 1:14 Protect that good thing entrusted to you, through the Holy Spirit who lives within us.
2TI 1:15 You know that everyone in the province of Asia deserted me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.
2TI 1:16 May the Lord grant mercy to the family of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my imprisonment.
2TI 1:17 But when he arrived in Rome, he eagerly searched for me and found me.
2TI 1:18 May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that day! And you know very well all the ways he served me in Ephesus.
2TI 2:1 So you, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
2TI 2:2 And entrust what you heard me say in the presence of many others as witnesses to faithful people who will be competent to teach others as well.
2TI 2:3 Take your share of suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
2TI 2:4 No one in military service gets entangled in matters of everyday life; otherwise he will not please the one who recruited him.
2TI 2:5 Also, if anyone competes as an athlete, he will not be crowned as the winner unless he competes according to the rules.
2TI 2:6 The farmer who works hard ought to have the first share of the crops.
2TI 2:7 Think about what I am saying and the Lord will give you understanding of all this.
2TI 2:8 Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David; such is my gospel,
2TI 2:9 for which I suffer hardship to the point of imprisonment as a criminal, but God’s message is not imprisoned!
2TI 2:10 So I endure all things for the sake of those chosen by God, that they too may obtain salvation in Christ Jesus and its eternal glory.
2TI 2:11 This saying is trustworthy: If we died with him, we will also live with him.
2TI 2:12 If we endure, we will also reign with him. If we deny him, he will also deny us.
2TI 2:13 If we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, since he cannot deny himself.
2TI 2:14 Remind people of these things and solemnly charge them before the Lord not to wrangle over words. This is of no benefit; it just brings ruin on those who listen.
2TI 2:15 Make every effort to present yourself before God as a proven worker who does not need to be ashamed, teaching the message of truth accurately.
2TI 2:16 But avoid profane chatter, because those occupied with it will stray further and further into ungodliness,
2TI 2:17 and their message will spread its infection like gangrene. Hymenaeus and Philetus are in this group.
2TI 2:18 They have strayed from the truth by saying that the resurrection has already occurred, and they are undermining some people’s faith.
2TI 2:19 However, God’s solid foundation remains standing, bearing this seal: “ The Lord knows those who are his,” and “Everyone who confesses the name of the Lord must turn away from evil.”
2TI 2:20 Now in a wealthy home there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also ones made of wood and of clay, and some are for honorable use, but others for ignoble use.
2TI 2:21 So if someone cleanses himself of such behavior, he will be a vessel for honorable use, set apart, useful for the Master, prepared for every good work.
2TI 2:22 But keep away from youthful passions, and pursue righteousness, faithfulness, love, and peace, in company with others who call on the Lord from a pure heart.
2TI 2:23 But reject foolish and ignorant controversies, because you know they breed infighting.
2TI 2:24 And the Lord’s slave must not engage in heated disputes but be kind toward all, an apt teacher, patient,
2TI 2:25 correcting opponents with gentleness. Perhaps God will grant them repentance and then knowledge of the truth
2TI 2:26 and they will come to their senses and escape the devil’s trap where they are held captive to do his will.
2TI 3:1 But understand this, that in the last days difficult times will come.
2TI 3:2 For people will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy,
2TI 3:3 unloving, irreconcilable, slanderers, without self-control, savage, opposed to what is good,
2TI 3:4 treacherous, reckless, conceited, loving pleasure rather than loving God.
2TI 3:5 They will maintain the outward appearance of religion but will have repudiated its power. So avoid people like these.
2TI 3:6 For some of these insinuate themselves into households and captivate weak women who are overwhelmed with sins and led along by various passions.
2TI 3:7 Such women are always seeking instruction, yet never able to arrive at a knowledge of the truth.
2TI 3:8 And just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these people – who have warped minds and are disqualified in the faith – also oppose the truth.
2TI 3:9 But they will not go much further, for their foolishness will be obvious to everyone, just like it was with Jannes and Jambres.
2TI 3:10 You, however, have followed my teaching, my way of life, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my endurance,
2TI 3:11 as well as the persecutions and sufferings that happened to me in Antioch, I endured these persecutions and the Lord delivered me from them all.
2TI 3:12 Now in fact all who want to live godly lives in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
2TI 3:13 But evil people and charlatans will go from bad to worse, deceiving others and being deceived themselves.
2TI 3:14 You, however, must continue in the things you have learned and are confident about. You know who taught you
2TI 3:15 and how from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to give you wisdom for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
2TI 3:16 Every scripture is inspired by God and useful for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness,
2TI 3:17 that the person dedicated to God may be capable and equipped for every good work.
2TI 4:1 I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is going to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom:
2TI 4:2 Preach the message, be ready whether it is convenient or not, reprove, rebuke, exhort with complete patience and instruction.
2TI 4:3 For there will be a time when people will not tolerate sound teaching. Instead, following their own desires, they will accumulate teachers for themselves, because they have an insatiable curiosity to hear new things.
2TI 4:4 And they will turn away from hearing the truth, but on the other hand they will turn aside to myths.
2TI 4:5 You, however, be self-controlled in all things, endure hardship, do an evangelist’s work, fulfill your ministry.
2TI 4:6 For I am already being poured out as an offering, and the time for me to depart is at hand.
2TI 4:7 I have competed well; I have finished the race; I have kept the faith!
2TI 4:8 Finally the crown of righteousness is reserved for me. The Lord, the righteous Judge, will award it to me in that day – and not to me only, but also to all who have set their affection on his appearing.
2TI 4:9 Make every effort to come to me soon.
2TI 4:10 For Demas deserted me, since he loved the present age, and he went to Thessalonica. Crescens went to Galatia and Titus to Dalmatia.
2TI 4:11 Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you, because he is a great help to me in ministry.
2TI 4:12 Now I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
2TI 4:13 When you come, bring with you the cloak I left in Troas with Carpas and the scrolls, especially the parchments.
2TI 4:14 Alexander the coppersmith did me a great deal of harm. The Lord will repay him in keeping with his deeds.
2TI 4:15 You be on guard against him too, because he vehemently opposed our words.
2TI 4:16 At my first defense no one appeared in my support; instead they all deserted me – may they not be held accountable for it.
2TI 4:17 But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the message would be fully proclaimed for all the Gentiles to hear. And so I was delivered from the lion’s mouth!
2TI 4:18 The Lord will deliver me from every evil deed and will bring me safely into his heavenly kingdom. To him be glory for ever and ever! Amen.
2TI 4:19 Greetings to Prisca and Aquila and the family of Onesiphorus.
2TI 4:20 Erastus stayed in Corinth. Trophimus I left ill in Miletus.
2TI 4:21 Make every effort to come before winter. Greetings to you from Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers and sisters.
2TI 4:22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.
TIT 1:1 From Paul, a slave of God and apostle of Jesus Christ, to further the faith of God’s chosen ones and the knowledge of the truth that is in keeping with godliness,
TIT 1:2 in hope of eternal life, which God, who does not lie, promised before the ages began.
TIT 1:3 But now in his own time he has made his message evident through the preaching I was entrusted with according to the command of God our Savior.
TIT 1:4 To Titus, my genuine son in a common faith. Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior!
TIT 1:5 The reason I left you in Crete was to set in order the remaining matters and to appoint elders in every town, as I directed you.
TIT 1:6 An elder must be blameless, the husband of one wife, with faithful children who cannot be charged with dissipation or rebellion.
TIT 1:7 For the overseer must be blameless as one entrusted with God’s work, not arrogant, not prone to anger, not a drunkard, not violent, not greedy for gain.
TIT 1:8 Instead he must be hospitable, devoted to what is good, sensible, upright, devout, and self-controlled.
TIT 1:9 He must hold firmly to the faithful message as it has been taught, so that he will be able to give exhortation in such healthy teaching and correct those who speak against it.
TIT 1:10 For there are many rebellious people, idle talkers, and deceivers, especially those with Jewish connections,
TIT 1:11 who must be silenced because they mislead whole families by teaching for dishonest gain what ought not to be taught.
TIT 1:12 A certain one of them, in fact, one of their own prophets, said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.”
TIT 1:13 Such testimony is true. For this reason rebuke them sharply that they may be healthy in the faith
TIT 1:14 and not pay attention to Jewish myths and commands of people who reject the truth.
TIT 1:15 All is pure to those who are pure. But to those who are corrupt and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but both their minds and consciences are corrupted.
TIT 1:16 They profess to know God but with their deeds they deny him, since they are detestable, disobedient, and unfit for any good deed.
TIT 2:1 But as for you, communicate the behavior that goes with sound teaching.
TIT 2:2 Older men are to be temperate, dignified, self-controlled, sound in faith, in love, and in endurance.
TIT 2:3 Older women likewise are to exhibit behavior fitting for those who are holy, not slandering, not slaves to excessive drinking, but teaching what is good.
TIT 2:4 In this way they will train the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children,
TIT 2:5 to be self-controlled, pure, fulfilling their duties at home, kind, being subject to their own husbands, so that the message of God may not be discredited.
TIT 2:6 Encourage younger men likewise to be self-controlled,
TIT 2:7 showing yourself to be an example of good works in every way. In your teaching show integrity, dignity,
TIT 2:8 and a sound message that cannot be criticized, so that any opponent will be at a loss, because he has nothing evil to say about us.
TIT 2:9 Slaves are to be subject to their own masters in everything, to do what is wanted and not talk back,
TIT 2:10 not pilfering, but showing all good faith, in order to bring credit to the teaching of God our Savior in everything.
TIT 2:11 For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all people.
TIT 2:12 It trains us to reject godless ways and worldly desires and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives in the present age,
TIT 2:13 as we wait for the happy fulfillment of our hope in the glorious appearing of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ.
TIT 2:14 He gave himself for us to set us free from every kind of lawlessness and to purify for himself a people who are truly his, who are eager to do good.
TIT 2:15 So communicate these things with the sort of exhortation or rebuke that carries full authority. Don’t let anyone look down on you.
TIT 3:1 Remind them to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work.
TIT 3:2 They must not slander anyone, but be peaceable, gentle, showing complete courtesy to all people.
TIT 3:3 For we too were once foolish, disobedient, misled, enslaved to various passions and desires, spending our lives in evil and envy, hateful and hating one another.
TIT 3:4 But “when the kindness of God our Savior and his love for mankind appeared,
TIT 3:5 he saved us not by works of righteousness that we have done but on the basis of his mercy, through the washing of the new birth and the renewing of the Holy Spirit,
TIT 3:6 whom he poured out on us in full measure through Jesus Christ our Savior.
TIT 3:7 And so, since we have been justified by his grace, we become heirs with the confident expectation of eternal life.”
TIT 3:8 This saying is trustworthy, and I want you to insist on such truths, so that those who have placed their faith in God may be intent on engaging in good works. These things are good and beneficial for all people.
TIT 3:9 But avoid foolish controversies, genealogies, quarrels, and fights about the law, because they are useless and empty.
TIT 3:10 Reject a divisive person after one or two warnings.
TIT 3:11 You know that such a person is twisted by sin and is conscious of it himself.
TIT 3:12 When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there.
TIT 3:13 Make every effort to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way; make sure they have what they need.
TIT 3:14 Here is another way that our people can learn to engage in good works to meet pressing needs and so not be unfruitful.
TIT 3:15 Everyone with me greets you. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all.
PHM 1:1 From Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our dear friend and colaborer,
PHM 1:2 to Apphia our sister, to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church that meets in your house.
PHM 1:3 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
PHM 1:4 I always thank my God as I remember you in my prayers,
PHM 1:5 because I hear of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints.
PHM 1:6 I pray that the faith you share with us may deepen your understanding of every blessing that belongs to you in Christ.
PHM 1:7 I have had great joy and encouragement because of your love, for the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother.
PHM 1:8 So, although I have quite a lot of confidence in Christ and could command you to do what is proper,
PHM 1:9 I would rather appeal to you on the basis of love – I, Paul, an old man and even now a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus –
PHM 1:10 I am appealing to you concerning my child, whose spiritual father I have become during my imprisonment, that is, Onesimus,
PHM 1:11 who was formerly useless to you, but is now useful to you and me.
PHM 1:12 I have sent him (who is my very heart) back to you.
PHM 1:13 I wanted to keep him so that he could serve me in your place during my imprisonment for the sake of the gospel.
PHM 1:14 However, without your consent I did not want to do anything, so that your good deed would not be out of compulsion, but from your own willingness.
PHM 1:15 For perhaps it was for this reason that he was separated from you for a little while, so that you would have him back eternally,
PHM 1:16 no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, as a dear brother. He is especially so to me, and even more so to you now, both humanly speaking and in the Lord.
PHM 1:17 Therefore if you regard me as a partner, accept him as you would me.
PHM 1:18 Now if he has defrauded you of anything or owes you anything, charge what he owes to me.
PHM 1:19 I, Paul, have written this letter with my own hand: I will repay it. I could also mention that you owe me your very self.
PHM 1:20 Yes, brother, let me have some benefit from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in Christ.
PHM 1:21 Since I was confident that you would obey, I wrote to you, because I knew that you would do even more than what I am asking you to do.
PHM 1:22 At the same time also, prepare a place for me to stay, for I hope that through your prayers I will be given back to you.
PHM 1:23 Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you.
PHM 1:24 Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my colaborers, greet you too.
PHM 1:25 May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
HEB 1:1 After God spoke long ago in various portions and in various ways to our ancestors through the prophets,
HEB 1:2 in these last days he has spoken to us in a son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom he created the world.
HEB 1:3 The Son is the radiance of his glory and the representation of his essence, and he sustains all things by his powerful word, and so when he had accomplished cleansing for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
HEB 1:4 Thus he became so far better than the angels as he has inherited a name superior to theirs.
HEB 1:5 For to which of the angels did God ever say, “ You are my son! Today I have fathered you”? And in another place he says, “ I will be his father and he will be my son.”
HEB 1:6 But when he again brings his firstborn into the world, he says, “ Let all the angels of God worship him!”
HEB 1:7 And he says of the angels, “ He makes his angels spirits and his ministers a flame of fire,”
HEB 1:8 but of the Son he says, “ Your throne, O God, is forever and ever, and a righteous scepter is the scepter of your kingdom.
HEB 1:9 You have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness. So God, your God, has anointed you over your companions with the oil of rejoicing.”
HEB 1:10 And, “ You founded the earth in the beginning, Lord, and the heavens are the works of your hands.
HEB 1:11 They will perish, but you continue. And they will all grow old like a garment,
HEB 1:12 and like a robe you will fold them up and like a garment they will be changed, but you are the same and your years will never run out.”
HEB 1:13 But to which of the angels has he ever said, “ Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet”?
HEB 1:14 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out to serve those who will inherit salvation?
HEB 2:1 Therefore we must pay closer attention to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
HEB 2:2 For if the message spoken through angels proved to be so firm that every violation or disobedience received its just penalty,
HEB 2:3 how will we escape if we neglect such a great salvation? It was first communicated through the Lord and was confirmed to us by those who heard him,
HEB 2:4 while God confirmed their witness with signs and wonders and various miracles and gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to his will.
HEB 2:5 For he did not put the world to come, about which we are speaking, under the control of angels.
HEB 2:6 Instead someone testified somewhere: “ What is man that you think of him or the son of man that you care for him?
HEB 2:7 You made him lower than the angels for a little while. You crowned him with glory and honor.
HEB 2:8 You put all things under his control.” For when he put all things under his control, he left nothing outside of his control. At present we do not yet see all things under his control,
HEB 2:9 but we see Jesus, who was made lower than the angels for a little while, now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death, so that by God’s grace he would experience death on behalf of everyone.
HEB 2:10 For it was fitting for him, for whom and through whom all things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the pioneer of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
HEB 2:11 For indeed he who makes holy and those being made holy all have the same origin, and so he is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters,
HEB 2:12 saying, “ I will proclaim your name to my brothers; in the midst of the assembly I will praise you*.”
HEB 2:13 Again he says, “I will be confident in him,” and again, “ Here I am, with the children God has given me*.”
HEB 2:14 Therefore, since the children share in flesh and blood, he likewise shared in their humanity, so that through death he could destroy the one who holds the power of death (that is, the devil),
HEB 2:15 and set free those who were held in slavery all their lives by their fear of death.
HEB 2:16 For surely his concern is not for angels, but he is concerned for Abraham’s descendants.
HEB 2:17 Therefore he had to be made like his brothers and sisters in every respect, so that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people.
HEB 2:18 For since he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.
HEB 3:1 Therefore, holy brothers and sisters, partners in a heavenly calling, take note of Jesus, the apostle and high priest whom we confess,
HEB 3:2 who is faithful to the one who appointed him, as Moses was also in God’s house.
HEB 3:3 For he has come to deserve greater glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house deserves greater honor than the house itself!
HEB 3:4 For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God.
HEB 3:5 Now Moses was faithful in all God’s house as a servant, to testify to the things that would be spoken.
HEB 3:6 But Christ is faithful as a son over God’s house. We are of his house, if in fact we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope we take pride in.
HEB 3:7 Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says, “ Oh, that today you would listen as he speaks!
HEB 3:8 “ Do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, in the day of testing in the wilderness.
HEB 3:9 “ There your fathers tested me and tried me, and they saw my works for forty years.
HEB 3:10 “ Therefore, I became provoked at that generation and said, ‘Their hearts are always wandering and they have not known my ways.’
HEB 3:11 “ As I swore in my anger, ‘They will never enter my rest!’”
HEB 3:12 See to it, brothers and sisters, that none of you has an evil, unbelieving heart that forsakes the living God.
HEB 3:13 But exhort one another each day, as long as it is called “Today,” that none of you may become hardened by sin’s deception.
HEB 3:14 For we have become partners with Christ, if in fact we hold our initial confidence firm until the end.
HEB 3:15 As it says, “ O, that today you would listen as he speaks! Do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.”
HEB 3:16 For which ones heard and rebelled? Was it not all who came out of Egypt under Moses’ leadership?
HEB 3:17 And against whom was God provoked for forty years? Was it not those who sinned, whose dead bodies fell in the wilderness?
HEB 3:18 And to whom did he swear they would never enter into his rest, except those who were disobedient?
HEB 3:19 So we see that they could not enter because of unbelief.
HEB 4:1 Therefore we must be wary that, while the promise of entering his rest remains open, none of you may seem to have come short of it.
HEB 4:2 For we had good news proclaimed to us just as they did. But the message they heard did them no good, since they did not join in with those who heard it in faith.
HEB 4:3 For we who have believed enter that rest, as he has said, “ As I swore in my anger, ‘They will never enter my rest!’” And yet God’s works were accomplished from the foundation of the world.
HEB 4:4 For he has spoken somewhere about the seventh day in this way: “ And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,”
HEB 4:5 but to repeat the text cited earlier: “ They will never enter my rest!”
HEB 4:6 Therefore it remains for some to enter it, yet those to whom it was previously proclaimed did not enter because of disobedience.
HEB 4:7 So God again ordains a certain day, “Today,” speaking through David after so long a time, as in the words quoted before, “ O, that today you would listen as he speaks! Do not harden your hearts.”
HEB 4:8 For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken afterward about another day.
HEB 4:9 Consequently a Sabbath rest remains for the people of God.
HEB 4:10 For the one who enters God’s rest has also rested from his works, just as God did from his own works.
HEB 4:11 Thus we must make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one may fall by following the same pattern of disobedience.
HEB 4:12 For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any double-edged sword, piercing even to the point of dividing soul from spirit, and joints from marrow; it is able to judge the desires and thoughts of the heart.
HEB 4:13 And no creature is hidden from God, but everything is naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must render an account.
HEB 4:14 Therefore since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast to our confession.
HEB 4:15 For we do not have a high priest incapable of sympathizing with our weaknesses, but one who has been tempted in every way just as we are, yet without sin.
HEB 4:16 Therefore let us confidently approach the throne of grace to receive mercy and find grace whenever we need help.
HEB 5:1 For every high priest is taken from among the people and appointed to represent them before God, to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.
HEB 5:2 He is able to deal compassionately with those who are ignorant and erring, since he also is subject to weakness,
HEB 5:3 and for this reason he is obligated to make sin offerings for himself as well as for the people.
HEB 5:4 And no one assumes this honor on his own initiative, but only when called to it by God, as in fact Aaron was.
HEB 5:5 So also Christ did not glorify himself in becoming high priest, but the one who glorified him was God, who said to him, “ You are my Son! Today I have fathered you,”
HEB 5:6 as also in another place God says, “ You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.”
HEB 5:7 During his earthly life Christ offered both requests and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to the one who was able to save him from death and he was heard because of his devotion.
HEB 5:8 Although he was a son, he learned obedience through the things he suffered.
HEB 5:9 And by being perfected in this way, he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him,
HEB 5:10 and he was designated by God as high priest in the order of Melchizedek.
HEB 5:11 On this topic we have much to say and it is difficult to explain, since you have become sluggish in hearing.
HEB 5:12 For though you should in fact be teachers by this time, you need someone to teach you the beginning elements of God’s utterances. You have gone back to needing milk, not solid food.
HEB 5:13 For everyone who lives on milk is inexperienced in the message of righteousness, because he is an infant.
HEB 5:14 But solid food is for the mature, whose perceptions are trained by practice to discern both good and evil.
HEB 6:1 Therefore we must progress beyond the elementary instructions about Christ and move on to maturity, not laying this foundation again: repentance from dead works and faith in God,
HEB 6:2 teaching about baptisms, laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment.
HEB 6:3 And this is what we intend to do, if God permits.
HEB 6:4 For it is impossible in the case of those who have once been enlightened, tasted the heavenly gift, become partakers of the Holy Spirit,
HEB 6:5 tasted the good word of God and the miracles of the coming age,
HEB 6:6 and then have committed apostasy, to renew them again to repentance, since they are crucifying the Son of God for themselves all over again and holding him up to contempt.
HEB 6:7 For the ground that has soaked up the rain that frequently falls on it and yields useful vegetation for those who tend it receives a blessing from God.
HEB 6:8 But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is useless and about to be cursed; its fate is to be burned.
HEB 6:9 But in your case, dear friends, even though we speak like this, we are convinced of better things relating to salvation.
HEB 6:10 For God is not unjust so as to forget your work and the love you have demonstrated for his name, in having served and continuing to serve the saints.
HEB 6:11 But we passionately want each of you to demonstrate the same eagerness for the fulfillment of your hope until the end,
HEB 6:12 so that you may not be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and perseverance inherit the promises.
HEB 6:13 Now when God made his promise to Abraham, since he could swear by no one greater, he swore by himself,
HEB 6:14 saying, “ Surely I will bless you greatly and multiply your descendants abundantly.”
HEB 6:15 And so by persevering, Abraham inherited the promise.
HEB 6:16 For people swear by something greater than themselves, and the oath serves as a confirmation to end all dispute.
HEB 6:17 In the same way God wanted to demonstrate more clearly to the heirs of the promise that his purpose was unchangeable, and so he intervened with an oath,
HEB 6:18 so that we who have found refuge in him may find strong encouragement to hold fast to the hope set before us through two unchangeable things, since it is impossible for God to lie.
HEB 6:19 We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, sure and steadfast, which reaches inside behind the curtain,
HEB 6:20 where Jesus our forerunner entered on our behalf, since he became a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek forever in the order of Melchizedek.
HEB 7:1 Now this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, met Abraham as he was returning from defeating the kings and blessed him.
HEB 7:2 To him also t Abraham apportioned a tithe apportioned a tithe of everything. His name first means king of righteousness, then king of Salem of Salem, that is, king of peace.
HEB 7:3 Without father, without mother, without genealogy, he has neither beginning of days nor end of life but is like the son of God, and he remains a priest for all time.
HEB 7:4 But see how great he must be, if Abraham the patriarch gave him a tithe of his plunder.
HEB 7:5 And those of the sons of Levi who receive the priestly office have authorization according to the law to collect a tithe from the people, that is, from their fellow countrymen, although they too are descendants of Abraham.
HEB 7:6 But Melchizedek who does not share their ancestry collected a tithe from Abraham and blessed the one who possessed the promise.
HEB 7:7 Now without dispute the inferior is blessed by the superior,
HEB 7:8 and in one case tithes are received by mortal men, while in the other by him who is affirmed to be alive.
HEB 7:9 And it could be said that Levi himself, who receives tithes, paid a tithe through Abraham.
HEB 7:10 For he was still in his ancestor Abraham’s loins when Melchizedek met him.
HEB 7:11 So if perfection had in fact been possible through the Levitical priesthood – for on that basis the people received the law – what further need would there have been for another priest to arise, said to be in the order of Melchizedek and not in Aaron’s order?
HEB 7:12 For when the priesthood changes, a change in the law must come as well.
HEB 7:13 Yet the one these things are spoken about belongs to a different tribe, and no one from that tribe has ever officiated at the altar.
HEB 7:14 For it is clear that our Lord is descended from Judah, yet Moses said nothing about priests in connection with that tribe.
HEB 7:15 And this is even clearer if another priest arises in the likeness of Melchizedek,
HEB 7:16 who has become a priest not by a legal regulation about physical descent but by the power of an indestructible life.
HEB 7:17 For here is the testimony about him: “ You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.”
HEB 7:18 On the one hand a former command is set aside because it is weak and useless,
HEB 7:19 for the law made nothing perfect. On the other hand a better hope is introduced, through which we draw near to God.
HEB 7:20 And since this was not done without a sworn affirmation – for the others have become priests without a sworn affirmation,
HEB 7:21 but Jesus did so with a sworn affirmation by the one who said to him, “ The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind, ‘You are a priest forever’” –
HEB 7:22 accordingly Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
HEB 7:23 And the others who became priests were numerous, because death prevented them from continuing in office,
HEB 7:24 but he holds his priesthood permanently since he lives forever.
HEB 7:25 So he is able to save completely those who come to God through him, because he always lives to intercede for them.
HEB 7:26 For it is indeed fitting for us to have such a high priest: holy, innocent, undefiled, separate from sinners, and exalted above the heavens.
HEB 7:27 He has no need to do every day what those priests do, to offer sacrifices first for their own sins and then for the sins of the people, since he did this in offering himself once for all.
HEB 7:28 For the law appoints as high priests men subject to weakness, but the word of solemn affirmation that came after the law appoints a son made perfect forever.
HEB 8:1 Now the main point of what we are saying is this: We have such a high priest, one who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven,
HEB 8:2 a minister in the sanctuary and the true tabernacle that the Lord, not man, set up.
HEB 8:3 For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices. So this one too had to have something to offer.
HEB 8:4 Now if he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are already priests who offer the gifts prescribed by the law.
HEB 8:5 The place where they serve is a sketch and shadow of the heavenly sanctuary, just as Moses was warned by God as he was about to complete the tabernacle. For he says, “ See that you make everything according to the design shown to you on the mountain.”
HEB 8:6 But now Jesus has obtained a superior ministry, since the covenant that he mediates is also better and is enacted on better promises.
HEB 8:7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, no one would have looked for a second one.
HEB 8:8 But showing its fault, God says to them, “ Look, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will complete a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.
HEB 8:9 “ It will not be like the covenant that I made with their fathers, on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, because they did not continue in my covenant and I had no regard for them, says the Lord*.
HEB 8:10 “ For this is the covenant that I will establish with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord. I will put my laws in their minds and I will inscribe them on their hearts. And I will be their God and they will be my people.
HEB 8:11 “ And there will be no need at all for each one to teach his countryman or each one to teach his brother saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ since they will all know me, from the least to the greatest.
HEB 8:12 “ For I will be merciful toward their evil deeds, and their sins I will remember no longer.”
HEB 8:13 When he speaks of a new covenant, he makes the first obsolete. Now what is growing obsolete and aging is about to disappear.
HEB 9:1 Now the first covenant, in fact, had regulations for worship and its earthly sanctuary.
HEB 9:2 For a tent was prepared, the outer one, which contained the lampstand, the table, and the presentation of the loaves; this is called the holy place.
HEB 9:3 And after the second curtain there was a tent called the holy of holies.
HEB 9:4 It contained the golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant covered entirely with gold. In this ark were the golden urn containing the manna, Aaron’s rod that budded, and the stone tablets of the covenant.
HEB 9:5 And above the ark were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat. Now is not the time to speak of these things in detail.
HEB 9:6 So with these things prepared like this, the priests enter continually into the outer tent as they perform their duties.
HEB 9:7 But only the high priest enters once a year into the inner tent, and not without blood that he offers for himself and for the sins of the people committed in ignorance.
HEB 9:8 The Holy Spirit is making clear that the way into the holy place had not yet appeared as long as the old tabernacle was standing.
HEB 9:9 This was a symbol for the time then present, when gifts and sacrifices were offered that could not perfect the conscience of the worshiper.
HEB 9:10 They served only for matters of food and drink and various washings; they are external regulations imposed until the new order came.
HEB 9:11 But now Christ has come as the high priest of the good things to come. He passed through the greater and more perfect tent not made with hands, that is, not of this creation,
HEB 9:12 and he entered once for all into the most holy place not by the blood of goats and calves but by his own blood, and so he himself secured eternal redemption.
HEB 9:13 For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a young cow sprinkled on those who are defiled consecrated them and provided ritual purity,
HEB 9:14 how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify our consciences from dead works to worship the living God.
HEB 9:15 And so he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the eternal inheritance he has promised, since he died to set them free from the violations committed under the first covenant.
HEB 9:16 For where there is a will, the death of the one who made it must be proven.
HEB 9:17 For a will takes effect only at death, since it carries no force while the one who made it is alive.
HEB 9:18 So even the first covenant was inaugurated with blood.
HEB 9:19 For when Moses had spoken every command to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and goats with water and scarlet wool and hyssop and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
HEB 9:20 and said, “ This is the blood of the covenant that God has commanded you to keep.”
HEB 9:21 And both the tabernacle and all the utensils of worship he likewise sprinkled with blood.
HEB 9:22 Indeed according to the law almost everything was purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.
HEB 9:23 So it was necessary for the sketches of the things in heaven to be purified with these sacrifices, but the heavenly things themselves required better sacrifices than these.
HEB 9:24 For Christ did not enter a sanctuary made with hands – the representation of the true sanctuary – but into heaven itself, and he appears now in God’s presence for us.
HEB 9:25 And he did not enter to offer himself again and again, the way the high priest enters the sanctuary year after year with blood that is not his own,
HEB 9:26 for then he would have had to suffer again and again since the foundation of the world. But now he has appeared once for all at the consummation of the ages to put away sin by his sacrifice.
HEB 9:27 And just as people are appointed to die once, and then to face judgment,
HEB 9:28 so also, after Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many, to those who eagerly await him he will appear a second time, not to bear sin but to bring salvation.
HEB 10:1 For the law possesses a shadow of the good things to come but not the reality itself, and is therefore completely unable, by the same sacrifices offered continually, year after year, to perfect those who come to worship.
HEB 10:2 For otherwise would they not have ceased to be offered, since the worshipers would have been purified once for all and so have no further consciousness of sin?
HEB 10:3 But in those sacrifices there is a reminder of sins year after year.
HEB 10:4 For the blood of bulls and goats cannot take away sins.
HEB 10:5 So when he came into the world, he said, “ Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me.
HEB 10:6 “ Whole burnt offerings and sin-offerings you took no delight in.
HEB 10:7 “ Then I said, ‘Here I am: I have come – it is written of me in the scroll of the book – to do your will, O God*.’”
HEB 10:8 When he says above, “ Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sin-offeringsyou did not desire nor did you take delight in them” (which are offered according to the law),
HEB 10:9 then he says, “ Here I am: I have come to do your will.” He does away with the first to establish the second.
HEB 10:10 By his will we have been made holy through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
HEB 10:11 And every priest stands day after day serving and offering the same sacrifices again and again – sacrifices that can never take away sins.
HEB 10:12 But when this priest had offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, he sat down at the right hand of God,
HEB 10:13 where he is now waiting until his enemies are made a footstool for his feet.
HEB 10:14 For by one offering he has perfected for all time those who are made holy.
HEB 10:15 And the Holy Spirit also witnesses to us, for after saying,
HEB 10:16 “ This is the covenant that I will establish with them after those days, says the Lord. I will put my laws on their hearts and I will inscribe them on their minds,”
HEB 10:17 then he says, “ Their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no longer.”
HEB 10:18 Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer any offering for sin.
HEB 10:19 Therefore, brothers and sisters, since we have confidence to enter the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus,
HEB 10:20 by the fresh and living way that he inaugurated for us through the curtain, that is, through his flesh,
HEB 10:21 and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
HEB 10:22 let us draw near with a sincere heart in the assurance that faith brings, because we have had our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed in pure water.
HEB 10:23 And let us hold unwaveringly to the hope that we confess, for the one who made the promise is trustworthy.
HEB 10:24 And let us take thought of how to spur one another on to love and good works,
HEB 10:25 not abandoning our own meetings, as some are in the habit of doing, but encouraging each other, and even more so because you see the day drawing near.
HEB 10:26 For if we deliberately keep on sinning after receiving the knowledge of the truth, no further sacrifice for sins is left for us,
HEB 10:27 but only a certain fearful expectation of judgment and a fury of fire that will consume God’s enemies.
HEB 10:28 Someone who rejected the law of Moses was put to death without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
HEB 10:29 How much greater punishment do you think that person deserves who has contempt for the Son of God, and profanes the blood of the covenant that made him holy, and insults the Spirit of grace?
HEB 10:30 For we know the one who said, “ Vengeance is mine, I will repay,” and again, “ The Lord will judge his people.”
HEB 10:31 It is a terrifying thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
HEB 10:32 But remember the former days when you endured a harsh conflict of suffering after you were enlightened.
HEB 10:33 At times you were publicly exposed to abuse and afflictions, and at other times you came to share with others who were treated in that way.
HEB 10:34 For in fact you shared the sufferings of those in prison, and you accepted the confiscation of your belongings with joy, because you knew that you certainly had a better and lasting possession.
HEB 10:35 So do not throw away your confidence, because it has great reward.
HEB 10:36 For you need endurance in order to do God’s will and so receive what is promised.
HEB 10:37 For just a little longer and he who is coming will arrive and not delay.
HEB 10:38 But my righteous one will live by faith, and if he shrinks back, I take no pleasure in him.
HEB 10:39 But we are not among those who shrink back and thus perish, but are among those who have faith and preserve their souls.
HEB 11:1 Now faith is being sure of what we hope for, being convinced of what we do not see.
HEB 11:2 For by it the people of old received God’s commendation.
HEB 11:3 By faith we understand that the worlds were set in order at God’s command, so that the visible has its origin in the invisible.
HEB 11:4 By faith Abel offered God a greater sacrifice than Cain, and through his faith he was commended as righteous, because God commended him for his offerings. And through his faith he still speaks, though he is dead.
HEB 11:5 By faith Enoch was taken up so that he did not see death, and he was not to be found because God took him up. For before his removal he had been commended as having pleased God.
HEB 11:6 Now without faith it is impossible to please him, for the one who approaches God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him.
HEB 11:7 By faith Noah, when he was warned about things not yet seen, with reverent regard constructed an ark for the deliverance of his family. Through faith he condemned the world and became an heir of the righteousness that comes by faith.
HEB 11:8 By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place he would later receive as an inheritance, and he went out without understanding where he was going.
HEB 11:9 By faith he lived as a foreigner in the promised land as though it were a foreign country, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, who were fellow heirs of the same promise.
HEB 11:10 For he was looking forward to the city with firm foundations, whose architect and builder is God.
HEB 11:11 By faith, even though Sarah herself was barren and he was too old, he received the ability to procreate, because he regarded the one who had given the promise to be trustworthy.
HEB 11:12 So in fact children were fathered by one man – and this one as good as dead – like the number of stars in the sky and like the innumerable grains of sand on the seashore.
HEB 11:13 These all died in faith without receiving the things promised, but they saw them in the distance and welcomed them and acknowledged that they were strangers and foreigners on the earth.
HEB 11:14 For those who speak in such a way make it clear that they are seeking a homeland.
HEB 11:15 In fact, if they had been thinking of the land that they had left, they would have had opportunity to return.
HEB 11:16 But as it is, they aspire to a better land, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore, God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
HEB 11:17 By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac. He had received the promises, yet he was ready to offer up his only son.
HEB 11:18 God had told him, “ Through Isaac descendants will carry on your name,”
HEB 11:19 and he reasoned that God could even raise him from the dead, and in a sense he received him back from there.
HEB 11:20 By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning the future.
HEB 11:21 By faith Jacob, as he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshiped as he leaned on his staff as he leaned on his staff.
HEB 11:22 By faith Joseph, at the end of his life, mentioned the exodus of the sons of Israel and gave instructions about his burial.
HEB 11:23 By faith, when Moses was born, his parents hid him for three months, because they saw the child was beautiful and they were not afraid of the king’s edict.
HEB 11:24 By faith, when he grew up, Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,
HEB 11:25 choosing rather to be ill-treated with the people of God than to enjoy sin’s fleeting pleasure.
HEB 11:26 He regarded abuse suffered for Christ to be greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for his eyes were fixed on the reward.
HEB 11:27 By faith he left Egypt without fearing the king’s anger, for he persevered as though he could see the one who is invisible.
HEB 11:28 By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the one who destroyed the firstborn would not touch them.
HEB 11:29 By faith they crossed the Red Sea as if on dry ground, but when the Egyptians tried it, they were swallowed up.
HEB 11:30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell after the people marched around them for seven days.
HEB 11:31 By faith Rahab the prostitute escaped the destruction of the disobedient, because she welcomed the spies in peace.
HEB 11:32 And what more shall I say? For time will fail me if I tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets.
HEB 11:33 Through faith they conquered kingdoms, administered justice, gained what was promised, shut the mouths of lions,
HEB 11:34 quenched raging fire, escaped the edge of the sword, gained strength in weakness, became mighty in battle, put foreign armies to flight,
HEB 11:35 and women received back their dead raised to life. But others were tortured, not accepting release, to obtain resurrection to a better life.
HEB 11:36 And others experienced mocking and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment.
HEB 11:37 They were stoned, sawed apart, murdered with the sword; they went about in sheepskins and goatskins; they were destitute, afflicted, ill-treated
HEB 11:38 (the world was not worthy of them); they wandered in deserts and mountains and caves and openings in the earth.
HEB 11:39 And these all were commended for their faith, yet they did not receive what was promised.
HEB 11:40 For God had provided something better for us, so that they would be made perfect together with us.
HEB 12:1 Therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, we must get rid of every weight and the sin that clings so closely, and run with endurance the race set out for us,
HEB 12:2 keeping our eyes fixed on Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of our faith. For the joy set out for him he endured the cross, disregarding its shame, and has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of God.
HEB 12:3 Think of him who endured such opposition against himself by sinners, so that you may not grow weary in your souls and give up.
HEB 12:4 You have not yet resisted to the point of bloodshed in your struggle against sin.
HEB 12:5 And have you forgotten the exhortation addressed to you as sons? “ My son, do not scorn the Lord’s discipline or give up when he corrects you*.
HEB 12:6 “ For the Lord disciplines the one he loves and chastises every son he accepts.”
HEB 12:7 Endure your suffering as discipline; God is treating you as sons. For what son is there that a father does not discipline?
HEB 12:8 But if you do not experience discipline, something all sons have shared in, then you are illegitimate and are not sons.
HEB 12:9 Besides, we have experienced discipline from our earthly fathers and we respected them; shall we not submit ourselves all the more to the Father of spirits and receive life?
HEB 12:10 For they disciplined us for a little while as seemed good to them, but he does so for our benefit, that we may share his holiness.
HEB 12:11 Now all discipline seems painful at the time, not joyful. But later it produces the fruit of peace and righteousness for those trained by it.
HEB 12:12 Therefore, strengthen your listless hands and your weak knees,
HEB 12:13 and make straight paths for your feet straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but be healed.
HEB 12:14 Pursue peace with everyone, and holiness, for without it no one will see the Lord.
HEB 12:15 See to it that no one comes short of the grace of God, that no one be like a bitter root springing up and causing trouble, and through him many become defiled.
HEB 12:16 And see to it that no one becomes an immoral or godless person like Esau, who sold his own birthright for a single meal.
HEB 12:17 For you know that later when he wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no opportunity for repentance, although he sought the blessing with tears.
HEB 12:18 For you have not come to something that can be touched, to a burning fire and darkness and gloom and a whirlwind
HEB 12:19 and the blast of a trumpet and a voice uttering words such that those who heard begged to hear no more.
HEB 12:20 For they could not bear what was commanded: “ If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned.”
HEB 12:21 In fact, the scene was so terrifying that Moses said, “ I shudder with fear.”
HEB 12:22 But you have come to Mount Zion, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels, to the assembly
HEB 12:23 and congregation of the firstborn, who are enrolled in heaven, and to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of the righteous, who have been made perfect,
HEB 12:24 and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks of something better than Abel’s does.
HEB 12:25 Take care not to refuse the one who is speaking! For if they did not escape when they refused the one who warned them on earth, how much less shall we, if we reject the one who warns from heaven?
HEB 12:26 Then his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, “ I will once more shake not only the earth but heaven too.”
HEB 12:27 Now this phrase “ once more” indicates the removal of what is shaken, that is, of created things, so that what is unshaken may remain.
HEB 12:28 So since we are receiving an unshakable kingdom, let us give thanks, and through this let us offer worship pleasing to God in devotion and awe.
HEB 12:29 For our God is indeed a devouring fire.
HEB 13:1 Brotherly love must continue.
HEB 13:2 Do not neglect hospitality, because through it some have entertained angels without knowing it.
HEB 13:3 Remember those in prison as though you were in prison with them, and those ill-treated as though you too felt their torment.
HEB 13:4 Marriage must be honored among all and the marriage bed kept undefiled, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.
HEB 13:5 Your conduct must be free from the love of money and you must be content with what you have, for he has said, “ I will never leave you and I will never abandon you.”
HEB 13:6 So we can say with confidence, “ The Lord is my helper, and I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?*”
HEB 13:7 Remember your leaders, who spoke God’s message to you; reflect on the outcome of their lives and imitate their faith.
HEB 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever!
HEB 13:9 Do not be carried away by all sorts of strange teachings. For it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not ritual meals, which have never benefited those who participated in them.
HEB 13:10 We have an altar that those who serve in the tabernacle have no right to eat from.
HEB 13:11 For the bodies of those animals whose blood the high priest brings into the sanctuary as an offering for sin are burned outside the camp.
HEB 13:12 Therefore, to sanctify the people by his own blood, Jesus also suffered outside the camp.
HEB 13:13 We must go out to him, then, outside the camp, bearing the abuse he experienced.
HEB 13:14 For here we have no lasting city, but we seek the city that is to come.
HEB 13:15 Through him then let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of our lips, acknowledging his name.
HEB 13:16 And do not neglect to do good and to share what you have, for God is pleased with such sacrifices.
HEB 13:17 Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your souls and will give an account for their work. Let them do this with joy and not with complaints, for this would be no advantage for you.
HEB 13:18 Pray for us, for we are sure that we have a clear conscience and desire to conduct ourselves rightly in every respect.
HEB 13:19 I especially ask you to pray that I may be restored to you very soon.
HEB 13:20 Now may the God of peace who by the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus Christ,
HEB 13:21 equip you with every good thing to do his will, working in us what is pleasing before him through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever. Amen.
HEB 13:22 Now I urge you, brothers and sisters, bear with my message of exhortation, for in fact I have written to you briefly.
HEB 13:23 You should know that our brother Timothy has been released. If he comes soon, he will be with me when I see you.
HEB 13:24 Greetings to all your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy send you greetings.
HEB 13:25 Grace be with you all.
JAM 1:1 From James, a slave of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes dispersed abroad. Greetings!
JAM 1:2 My brothers and sisters, consider it nothing but joy when you fall into all sorts of trials,
JAM 1:3 because you know that the testing of your faith produces endurance.
JAM 1:4 And let endurance have its perfect effect, so that you will be perfect and complete, not deficient in anything.
JAM 1:5 But if anyone is deficient in wisdom, he should ask God, who gives to all generously and without reprimand, and it will be given to him.
JAM 1:6 But he must ask in faith without doubting, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown and tossed around by the wind.
JAM 1:7 For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord,
JAM 1:8 since he is a double-minded individual, unstable in all his ways.
JAM 1:9 Now the believer of humble means should take pride in his high position.
JAM 1:10 But the rich person’s pride should be in his humiliation, because he will pass away like a wildflower in the meadow.
JAM 1:11 For the sun rises with its heat and dries up the meadow; the petal of the flower falls off and its beauty is lost forever. So also the rich person in the midst of his pursuits will wither away.
JAM 1:12 Happy is the one who endures testing, because when he has proven to be genuine, he will receive the crown of life that God promised to those who love him.
JAM 1:13 Let no one say when he is tempted, “I am tempted by God,” for God cannot be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one.
JAM 1:14 But each one is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desires.
JAM 1:15 Then when desire conceives, it gives birth to sin, and when sin is full grown, it gives birth to death.
JAM 1:16 Do not be led astray, my dear brothers and sisters.
JAM 1:17 All generous giving and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or the slightest hint of change.
JAM 1:18 By his sovereign plan he gave us birth through the message of truth, that we would be a kind of firstfruits of all he created.
JAM 1:19 Understand this, my dear brothers and sisters! Let every person be quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger.
JAM 1:20 For human anger does not accomplish God’s righteousness.
JAM 1:21 So put away all filth and evil excess and humbly welcome the message implanted within you, which is able to save your souls.
JAM 1:22 But be sure you live out the message and do not merely listen to it and so deceive yourselves.
JAM 1:23 For if someone merely listens to the message and does not live it out, he is like someone who gazes at his own face in a mirror.
JAM 1:24 For he gazes at himself and then goes out and immediately forgets what sort of person he was.
JAM 1:25 But the one who peers into the perfect law of liberty and fixes his attention there, and does not become a forgetful listener but one who lives it out – he will be blessed in what he does.
JAM 1:26 If someone thinks he is religious yet does not bridle his tongue, and so deceives his heart, his religion is futile.
JAM 1:27 Pure and undefiled religion before God the Father is this: to care for orphans and widows in their misfortune and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
JAM 2:1 My brothers and sisters, do not show prejudice if you possess faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ.
JAM 2:2 For if someone comes into your assembly wearing a gold ring and fine clothing, and a poor person enters in filthy clothes,
JAM 2:3 do you pay attention to the one who is finely dressed and say, “You sit here in a good place,” and to the poor person, “You stand over there,” or “Sit on the floor”?
JAM 2:4 If so, have you not made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil motives?
JAM 2:5 Listen, my dear brothers and sisters! Did not God choose the poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom that he promised to those who love him?
JAM 2:6 But you have dishonored the poor! Are not the rich oppressing you and dragging you into the courts?
JAM 2:7 Do they not blaspheme the good name of the one you belong to?
JAM 2:8 But if you fulfill the royal law as expressed in this scripture, “ You shall love your neighbor as yourself your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing well.
JAM 2:9 But if you show prejudice, you are committing sin and are convicted by the law as violators.
JAM 2:10 For the one who obeys the whole law but fails in one point has become guilty of all of it.
JAM 2:11 For he who said, “Do not commit adultery,” also said, “Do not murder.” Now if you do not commit adultery but do commit murder, you have become a violator of the law.
JAM 2:12 Speak and act as those who will be judged by a law that gives freedom.
JAM 2:13 For judgment is merciless for the one who has shown no mercy. But mercy triumphs over judgment.
JAM 2:14 What good is it, my brothers and sisters, if someone claims to have faith but does not have works? Can this kind of faith save him?
JAM 2:15 If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacks daily food,
JAM 2:16 and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, keep warm and eat well,” but you do not give them what the body needs, what good is it?
JAM 2:17 So also faith, if it does not have works, is dead being by itself.
JAM 2:18 But someone will say, “You have faith and I have works.” Show me your faith without works and I will show you faith by my works.
JAM 2:19 You believe that God is one; well and good. Even the demons believe that – and tremble with fear.
JAM 2:20 But would you like evidence, you empty fellow, that faith without works is useless?
JAM 2:21 Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he offered Isaac his son on the altar?
JAM 2:22 You see that his faith was working together with his works and his faith was perfected by works.
JAM 2:23 And the scripture was fulfilled that says, “Now Abraham believed God and it was counted to him for righteousness,” and he was called God’s friend.
JAM 2:24 You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone.
JAM 2:25 And similarly, was not Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when she welcomed the messengers and sent them out by another way?
JAM 2:26 For just as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.
JAM 3:1 Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers and sisters, because you know that we will be judged more strictly.
JAM 3:2 For we all stumble in many ways. If someone does not stumble in what he says, he is a perfect individual, able to control the entire body as well.
JAM 3:3 And if we put bits into the mouths of horses to get them to obey us, then we guide their entire bodies.
JAM 3:4 Look at ships too: Though they are so large and driven by harsh winds, they are steered by a tiny rudder wherever the pilot’s inclination directs.
JAM 3:5 So too the tongue is a small part of the body, yet it has great pretensions. Think how small a flame sets a huge forest ablaze.
JAM 3:6 And the tongue is a fire! The tongue represents the world of wrongdoing among the parts of our bodies. It pollutes the entire body and sets fire to the course of human existence – and is set on fire by hell.
JAM 3:7 For every kind of animal, bird, reptile, and sea creature is subdued and has been subdued by humankind.
JAM 3:8 But no human being can subdue the tongue; it is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
JAM 3:9 With it we bless the Lord and Father, and with it we curse people made in God’s image.
JAM 3:10 From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. These things should not be so, my brothers and sisters.
JAM 3:11 A spring does not pour out fresh water and bitter water from the same opening, does it?
JAM 3:12 Can a fig tree produce olives, my brothers and sisters, or a vine produce figs? Neither can a salt water spring produce fresh water.
JAM 3:13 Who is wise and understanding among you? By his good conduct he should show his works done in the gentleness that wisdom brings.
JAM 3:14 But if you have bitter jealousy and selfishness in your hearts, do not boast and tell lies against the truth.
JAM 3:15 Such wisdom does not come from above but is earthly, natural, demonic.
JAM 3:16 For where there is jealousy and selfishness, there is disorder and every evil practice.
JAM 3:17 But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, accommodating, full of mercy and good fruit, impartial, and not hypocritical.
JAM 3:18 And the fruit that consists of righteousness is planted in peace among those who make peace.
JAM 4:1 Where do the conflicts and where do the quarrels among you come from? Is it not from this, from your passions that battle inside you?
JAM 4:2 You desire and you do not have; you murder and envy and you cannot obtain; you quarrel and fight. You do not have because you do not ask;
JAM 4:3 you ask and do not receive because you ask wrongly, so you can spend it on your passions.
JAM 4:4 Adulterers, do you not know that friendship with the world means hostility toward God? So whoever decides to be the world’s friend makes himself God’s enemy.
JAM 4:5 Or do you think the scripture means nothing when it says, “The spirit that God caused to live within us has an envious yearning”?
JAM 4:6 But he gives greater grace. Therefore it says, “ God opposes the proud, but he gives grace to the humble.”
JAM 4:7 So submit to God. But resist the devil and he will flee from you.
JAM 4:8 Draw near to God and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and make your hearts pure, you double-minded.
JAM 4:9 Grieve, mourn, and weep. Turn your laughter into mourning and your joy into despair.
JAM 4:10 Humble yourselves before the Lord and he will exalt you.
JAM 4:11 Do not speak against one another, brothers and sisters. He who speaks against a fellow believer or judges a fellow believer speaks against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law but its judge.
JAM 4:12 But there is only one who is lawgiver and judge – the one who is able to save and destroy. On the other hand, who are you to judge your neighbor?
JAM 4:13 Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go into this or that town and spend a year there and do business and make a profit.”
JAM 4:14 You do not know about tomorrow. What is your life like? For you are a puff of smoke that appears for a short time and then vanishes.
JAM 4:15 You ought to say instead, “If the Lord is willing, then we will live and do this or that.”
JAM 4:16 But as it is, you boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil.
JAM 4:17 So whoever knows what is good to do and does not do it is guilty of sin.
JAM 5:1 Come now, you rich! Weep and cry aloud over the miseries that are coming on you.
JAM 5:2 Your riches have rotted and your clothing has become moth-eaten.
JAM 5:3 Your gold and silver have rusted and their rust will be a witness against you. It will consume your flesh like fire. It is in the last days that you have hoarded treasure!
JAM 5:4 Look, the pay you have held back from the workers who mowed your fields cries out against you, and the cries of the reapers have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts.
JAM 5:5 You have lived indulgently and luxuriously on the earth. You have fattened your hearts in a day of slaughter.
JAM 5:6 You have condemned and murdered the righteous person, although he does not resist you.
JAM 5:7 So be patient, brothers and sisters, until the Lord’s return. Think of how the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the ground and is patient for it until it receives the early and late rains.
JAM 5:8 You also be patient and strengthen your hearts, for the Lord’s return is near.
JAM 5:9 Do not grumble against one another, brothers and sisters, so that you may not be judged. See, the judge stands before the gates!
JAM 5:10 As an example of suffering and patience, brothers and sisters, take the prophets who spoke in the Lord’s name.
JAM 5:11 Think of how we regard as blessed those who have endured. You have heard of Job’s endurance and you have seen the Lord’s purpose, that the Lord is full of compassion and mercy.
JAM 5:12 And above all, my brothers and sisters, do not swear, either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath. But let your “Yes” be yes and your “No” be no, so that you may not fall into judgment.
JAM 5:13 Is anyone among you suffering? He should pray. Is anyone in good spirits? He should sing praises.
JAM 5:14 Is anyone among you ill? He should summon the elders of the church, and they should pray for him and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord.
JAM 5:15 And the prayer of faith will save the one who is sick and the Lord will raise him up – and if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
JAM 5:16 So confess your sins to one another and pray for one another so that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous person has great effectiveness.
JAM 5:17 Elijah was a human being like us, and he prayed earnestly that it would not rain and there was no rain on the land for three years and six months!
JAM 5:18 Then he prayed again, and the sky gave rain and the land sprouted with a harvest.
JAM 5:19 My brothers and sisters, if anyone among you wanders from the truth and someone turns him back,
JAM 5:20 he should know that the one who turns a sinner back from his wandering path will save that person’s soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins.
1PE 1:1 From Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to those temporarily residing abroad (in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, the province of Asia, and Bithynia) who are chosen
1PE 1:2 according to the foreknowledge of God the Father by being set apart by the Spirit for obedience and for sprinkling with Jesus Christ’s blood. May grace and peace be yours in full measure!
1PE 1:3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By his great mercy he gave us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
1PE 1:4 that is, into an inheritance imperishable, undefiled, and unfading. It is reserved in heaven for you,
1PE 1:5 who by God’s power are protected through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
1PE 1:6 This brings you great joy, although you may have to suffer for a short time in various trials.
1PE 1:7 Such trials show the proven character of your faith, which is much more valuable than gold – gold that is tested by fire, even though it is passing away – and will bring praise and glory and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed.
1PE 1:8 You have not seen him, but you love him. You do not see him now but you believe in him, and so you rejoice with an indescribable and glorious joy,
1PE 1:9 because you are attaining the goal of your faith – the salvation of your souls.
1PE 1:10 Concerning this salvation, the prophets who predicted the grace that would come to you searched and investigated carefully.
1PE 1:11 They probed into what person or time the Spirit of Christ within them was indicating when he testified beforehand about the sufferings appointed for Christ and his subsequent glory.
1PE 1:12 They were shown that they were serving not themselves but you, in regard to the things now announced to you through those who proclaimed the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven – things angels long to catch a glimpse of.
1PE 1:13 Therefore, get your minds ready for action by being fully sober, and set your hope completely on the grace that will be brought to you when Jesus Christ is revealed.
1PE 1:14 Like obedient children, do not comply with the evil urges you used to follow in your ignorance,
1PE 1:15 but, like the Holy One who called you, become holy yourselves in all of your conduct,
1PE 1:16 for it is written, “ You shall be holy, because I am holy.”
1PE 1:17 And if you address as Father the one who impartially judges according to each one’s work, live out the time of your temporary residence here in reverence.
1PE 1:18 You know that from your empty way of life inherited from your ancestors you were ransomed – not by perishable things like silver or gold,
1PE 1:19 but by precious blood like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb, namely Christ.
1PE 1:20 He was foreknown before the foundation of the world but was manifested in these last times for your sake.
1PE 1:21 Through him you now trust in God, who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope are in God.
1PE 1:22 You have purified your souls by obeying the truth in order to show sincere mutual love. So love one another earnestly from a pure heart.
1PE 1:23 You have been born anew, not from perishable but from imperishable seed, through the living and enduring word of God.
1PE 1:24 For all flesh is like grass and all its glory like the flower of the grass; the grass withers and the flower falls off,
1PE 1:25 but the word of the Lord endures forever. And this is the word that was proclaimed to you.
1PE 2:1 So get rid of all evil and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander.
1PE 2:2 And yearn like newborn infants for pure, spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow up to salvation,
1PE 2:3 if you have experienced the Lord’s kindness.
1PE 2:4 So as you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen and priceless in God’s sight,
1PE 2:5 you yourselves, as living stones, are built up as a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood and to offer spiritual sacrifices that are acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
1PE 2:6 For it says in scripture, “ Look,I lay in Zion a stone, a chosen and priceless cornerstone, and whoever believes in him will never be put to shame*.”
1PE 2:7 So you who believe see his value, but for those who do not believe, the stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone,
1PE 2:8 and a stumbling-stone and a rock to trip over*. They stumble because they disobey the word, as they were destined to do.
1PE 2:9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people of his own, so that you may proclaim the virtues of the one who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
1PE 2:10 You once were not a people, but now you are God’s people. You were shown no mercy, but now you have received mercy.
1PE 2:11 Dear friends, I urge you as foreigners and exiles to keep away from fleshly desires that do battle against the soul,
1PE 2:12 and maintain good conduct among the non-Christians, so that though they now malign you as wrongdoers, they may see your good deeds and glorify God when he appears.
1PE 2:13 Be subject to every human institution for the Lord’s sake, whether to a king as supreme
1PE 2:14 or to governors as those he commissions to punish wrongdoers and praise those who do good.
1PE 2:15 For God wants you to silence the ignorance of foolish people by doing good.
1PE 2:16 Live as free people, not using your freedom as a pretext for evil, but as God’s slaves.
1PE 2:17 Honor all people, love the family of believers, fear God, honor the king.
1PE 2:18 Slaves, be subject to your masters with all reverence, not only to those who are good and gentle, but also to those who are perverse.
1PE 2:19 For this finds God’s favor, if because of conscience toward God someone endures hardships in suffering unjustly.
1PE 2:20 For what credit is it if you sin and are mistreated and endure it? But if you do good and suffer and so endure, this finds favor with God.
1PE 2:21 For to this you were called, since Christ also suffered for you, leaving an example for you to follow in his steps.
1PE 2:22 He committed no sin nor was deceit found in his mouth.
1PE 2:23 When he was maligned, he did not answer back; when he suffered, he threatened no retaliation, but committed himself to God who judges justly.
1PE 2:24 He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, that we may cease from sinning and live for righteousness. By his wounds you were healed.
1PE 2:25 For you were going astray like sheep but now you have turned back to the shepherd and guardian of your souls.
1PE 3:1 In the same way, wives, be subject to your own husbands. Then, even if some are disobedient to the word, they will be won over without a word by the way you live,
1PE 3:2 when they see your pure and reverent conduct.
1PE 3:3 Let your beauty not be external – the braiding of hair and wearing of gold jewelry or fine clothes –
1PE 3:4 but the inner person of the heart, the lasting beauty of a gentle and tranquil spirit, which is precious in God’s sight.
1PE 3:5 For in the same way the holy women who hoped in God long ago adorned themselves by being subject to their husbands,
1PE 3:6 like Sarah who obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. You become her children when you do what is good and have no fear in doing so.
1PE 3:7 Husbands, in the same way, treat your wives with consideration as the weaker partners and show them honor as fellow heirs of the grace of life. In this way nothing will hinder your prayers.
1PE 3:8 Finally, all of you be harmonious, sympathetic, affectionate, compassionate, and humble.
1PE 3:9 Do not return evil for evil or insult for insult, but instead bless others because you were called to inherit a blessing.
1PE 3:10 For the one who wants to love life and see good days must keep his tongue from evil and his lips from uttering deceit.
1PE 3:11 And he must turn away from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.
1PE 3:12 For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous and his ears are open to their prayer. But the Lord’s face is against those who do evil.
1PE 3:13 For who is going to harm you if you are devoted to what is good?
1PE 3:14 But in fact, if you happen to suffer for doing what is right, you are blessed. But do not be terrified of them or be shaken.
1PE 3:15 But set Christ apart as Lord in your hearts and always be ready to give an answer to anyone who asks about the hope you possess.
1PE 3:16 Yet do it with courtesy and respect, keeping a good conscience, so that those who slander your good conduct in Christ may be put to shame when they accuse you.
1PE 3:17 For it is better to suffer for doing good, if God wills it, than for doing evil.
1PE 3:18 Because Christ also suffered once for sins, the just for the unjust, to bring you to God, by being put to death in the flesh but by being made alive in the spirit.
1PE 3:19 In it he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
1PE 3:20 after they were disobedient long ago when God patiently waited in the days of Noah as an ark was being constructed. In the ark a few, that is eight souls, were delivered through water.
1PE 3:21 And this prefigured baptism, which now saves you – not the washing off of physical dirt but the pledge of a good conscience to God – through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
1PE 3:22 who went into heaven and is at the right hand of God with angels and authorities and powers subject to him.
1PE 4:1 So, since Christ suffered in the flesh, you also arm yourselves with the same attitude, because the one who has suffered in the flesh has finished with sin,
1PE 4:2 in that he spends the rest of his time on earth concerned about the will of God and not human desires.
1PE 4:3 For the time that has passed was sufficient for you to do what the non-Christians desire. You lived then in debauchery, evil desires, drunkenness, carousing, drinking bouts, and wanton idolatries.
1PE 4:4 So they are astonished when you do not rush with them into the same flood of wickedness, and they vilify you.
1PE 4:5 They will face a reckoning before Jesus Christ who stands ready to judge the living and the dead.
1PE 4:6 Now it was for this very purpose that the gospel was preached to those who are now dead, so that though they were judged in the flesh by human standards they may live spiritually by God’s standards.
1PE 4:7 For the culmination of all things is near. So be self-controlled and sober-minded for the sake of prayer.
1PE 4:8 Above all keep your love for one another fervent, because love covers a multitude of sins.
1PE 4:9 Show hospitality to one another without complaining.
1PE 4:10 Just as each one has received a gift, use it to serve one another as good stewards of the varied grace of God.
1PE 4:11 Whoever speaks, let it be with God’s words. Whoever serves, do so with the strength that God supplies, so that in everything God will be glorified through Jesus Christ. To him belong the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
1PE 4:12 Dear friends, do not be astonished that a trial by fire is occurring among you, as though something strange were happening to you.
1PE 4:13 But rejoice in the degree that you have shared in the sufferings of Christ, so that when his glory is revealed you may also rejoice and be glad.
1PE 4:14 If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory, who is the Spirit of God, rests on you.
1PE 4:15 But let none of you suffer as a murderer or thief or criminal or as a troublemaker.
1PE 4:16 But if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but glorify God that you bear such a name.
1PE 4:17 For it is time for judgment to begin, starting with the house of God. And if it starts with us, what will be the fate of those who are disobedient to the gospel of God?
1PE 4:18 And if the righteous are barely saved, what will become of the ungodly and sinners?
1PE 4:19 So then let those who suffer according to the will of God entrust their souls to a faithful Creator as they do good.
1PE 5:1 So as your fellow elder and a witness of Christ’s sufferings and as one who shares in the glory that will be revealed, I urge the elders among you:
1PE 5:2 Give a shepherd’s care to God’s flock among you, exercising oversight not merely as a duty but willingly under God’s direction, not for shameful profit but eagerly.
1PE 5:3 And do not lord it over those entrusted to you, but be examples to the flock.
1PE 5:4 Then when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that never fades away.
1PE 5:5 In the same way, you who are younger, be subject to the elders. And all of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.
1PE 5:6 And God will exalt you in due time, if you humble yourselves under his mighty hand
1PE 5:7 by casting all your cares on him because he cares for you.
1PE 5:8 Be sober and alert. Your enemy the devil, like a roaring lion, is on the prowl looking for someone to devour.
1PE 5:9 Resist him, strong in your faith, because you know that your brothers and sisters throughout the world are enduring the same kinds of suffering.
1PE 5:10 And, after you have suffered for a little while, the God of all grace who called you to his eternal glory in Christ will himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you.
1PE 5:11 To him belongs the power forever. Amen.
1PE 5:12 Through Silvanus, whom I know to be a faithful brother, I have written to you briefly, in order to encourage you and testify that this is the true grace of God. Stand fast in it.
1PE 5:13 The church in Babylon, chosen together with you, greets you, and so does Mark, my son.
1PE 5:14 Greet one another with a loving kiss. Peace to all of you who are in Christ.
2PE 1:1 From Simeon Peter, a slave and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who through the righteousness of our God and Savior, Jesus Christ, have been granted a faith just as precious as ours.
2PE 1:2 May grace and peace be lavished on you as you grow in the rich knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord!
2PE 1:3 I can pray this because his divine power has bestowed on us everything necessary for life and godliness through the rich knowledge of the one who called us by his own glory and excellence.
2PE 1:4 Through these things he has bestowed on us his precious and most magnificent promises, so that by means of what was promised you may become partakers of the divine nature, after escaping the worldly corruption that is produced by evil desire.
2PE 1:5 For this very reason, make every effort to add to your faith excellence, to excellence, knowledge;
2PE 1:6 to knowledge, self-control; to self-control, perseverance; to perseverance, godliness;
2PE 1:7 to godliness, brotherly affection; to brotherly affection, unselfish love.
2PE 1:8 For if these things are really yours and are continually increasing, they will keep you from becoming ineffective and unproductive in your pursuit of knowing our Lord Jesus Christ more intimately.
2PE 1:9 But concerning the one who lacks such things – he is blind. That is to say, he is nearsighted, since he has forgotten about the cleansing of his past sins.
2PE 1:10 Therefore, brothers and sisters, make every effort to be sure of your calling and election. For by doing this you will never stumble into sin.
2PE 1:11 For thus an entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, will be richly provided for you.
2PE 1:12 Therefore, I intend to remind you constantly of these things even though you know them and are well established in the truth that you now have.
2PE 1:13 Indeed, as long as I am in this tabernacle, I consider it right to stir you up by way of a reminder,
2PE 1:14 since I know that my tabernacle will soon be removed, because our Lord Jesus Christ revealed this to me.
2PE 1:15 Indeed, I will also make every effort that, after my departure, you have a testimony of these things.
2PE 1:16 For we did not follow cleverly concocted fables when we made known to you the power and return of our Lord Jesus Christ; no, we were eyewitnesses of his grandeur.
2PE 1:17 For he received honor and glory from God the Father, when that voice was conveyed to him by the Majestic Glory: “This is my dear Son, in whom I am delighted.”
2PE 1:18 When this voice was conveyed from heaven, we ourselves heard it, for we were with him on the holy mountain.
2PE 1:19 Moreover, we possess the prophetic word as an altogether reliable thing. You do well if you pay attention to this as you would to a light shining in a murky place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
2PE 1:20 Above all, you do well if you recognize this: No prophecy of scripture ever comes about by the prophet’s own imagination,
2PE 1:21 for no prophecy was ever borne of human impulse; rather, men carried along by the Holy Spirit spoke from God.
2PE 2:1 But false prophets arose among the people, just as there will be false teachers among you. These false teachers will infiltrate your midst with destructive heresies, even to the point of denying the Master who bought them. As a result, they will bring swift destruction on themselves.
2PE 2:2 And many will follow their debauched lifestyles. Because of these false teachers, the way of truth will be slandered.
2PE 2:3 And in their greed they will exploit you with deceptive words. Their condemnation pronounced long ago is not sitting idly by; their destruction is not asleep.
2PE 2:4 For if God did not spare the angels who sinned, but threw them into hell and locked them up in chains in utter darkness, to be kept until the judgment,
2PE 2:5 and if he did not spare the ancient world, but did protect Noah, a herald of righteousness, along with seven others, when God brought a flood on an ungodly world,
2PE 2:6 and if he turned to ashes the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah when he condemned them to destruction, having appointed them to serve as an example to future generations of the ungodly,
2PE 2:7 and if he rescued Lot, a righteous man in anguish over the debauched lifestyle of lawless men,
2PE 2:8 (for while he lived among them day after day, that righteous man was tormented in his righteous soul by the lawless deeds he saw and heard )
2PE 2:9 – if so, then the Lord knows how to rescue the godly from their trials, and to reserve the unrighteous for punishment at the day of judgment,
2PE 2:10 especially those who indulge their fleshly desires and who despise authority. Brazen and insolent, they are not afraid to insult the glorious ones,
2PE 2:11 yet even angels, who are much more powerful, do not bring a slanderous judgment against them before the Lord.
2PE 2:12 But these men, like irrational animals – creatures of instinct, born to be caught and destroyed – do not understand whom they are insulting, and consequently in their destruction they will be destroyed,
2PE 2:13 suffering harm as the wages for their harmful ways. By considering it a pleasure to carouse in broad daylight, they are stains and blemishes, indulging in their deceitful pleasures when they feast together with you.
2PE 2:14 Their eyes, full of adultery, never stop sinning; they entice unstable people. They have trained their hearts for greed, these cursed children!
2PE 2:15 By forsaking the right path they have gone astray, because they followed the way of Balaam son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,
2PE 2:16 yet was rebuked for his own transgression (a dumb donkey, speaking with a human voice, restrained the prophet’s madness).
2PE 2:17 These men are waterless springs and mists driven by a storm, for whom the utter depths of darkness have been reserved.
2PE 2:18 For by speaking high-sounding but empty words they are able to entice, with fleshly desires and with debauchery, people who have just escaped from those who reside in error.
2PE 2:19 Although these false teachers promise such people freedom, they themselves are enslaved to immorality. For whatever a person succumbs to, to that he is enslaved.
2PE 2:20 For if after they have escaped the filthy things of the world through the rich knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they again get entangled in them and succumb to them, their last state has become worse for them than their first.
2PE 2:21 For it would have been better for them never to have known the way of righteousness than, having known it, to turn back from the holy commandment that had been delivered to them.
2PE 2:22 They are illustrations of this true proverb: “ A dog returns to its own vomit,” and “A sow, after washing herself, wallows in the mire.”
2PE 3:1 Dear friends, this is already the second letter I have written you, in which I am trying to stir up your pure mind by way of reminder:
2PE 3:2 I want you to recall both the predictions foretold by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles.
2PE 3:3 Above all, understand this: In the last days blatant scoffers will come, being propelled by their own evil urges
2PE 3:4 and saying, “Where is his promised return? For ever since our ancestors died, all things have continued as they were from the beginning of creation.”
2PE 3:5 For they deliberately suppress this fact, that by the word of God heavens existed long ago and an earth was formed out of water and by means of water.
2PE 3:6 Through these things the world existing at that time was destroyed when it was deluged with water.
2PE 3:7 But by the same word the present heavens and earth have been reserved for fire, by being kept for the day of judgment and destruction of the ungodly.
2PE 3:8 Now, dear friends, do not let this one thing escape your notice, that a single day is like a thousand years with the Lord and a thousand years are like a single day.
2PE 3:9 The Lord is not slow concerning his promise, as some regard slowness, but is being patient toward you, because he does not wish for any to perish but for all to come to repentance.
2PE 3:10 But the day of the Lord will come like a thief; when it comes, the heavens will disappear with a horrific noise, and the celestial bodies will melt away in a blaze, and the earth and every deed done on it will be laid bare.
2PE 3:11 Since all these things are to melt away in this manner, what sort of people must we be, conducting our lives in holiness and godliness,
2PE 3:12 while waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God? Because of this day, the heavens will be burned up and dissolve, and the celestial bodies will melt away in a blaze!
2PE 3:13 But, according to his promise, we are waiting for new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness truly resides.
2PE 3:14 Therefore, dear friends, since you are waiting for these things, strive to be found at peace, without spot or blemish, when you come into his presence.
2PE 3:15 And regard the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as also our dear brother Paul wrote to you, according to the wisdom given to him,
2PE 3:16 speaking of these things in all his letters. Some things in these letters are hard to understand, things the ignorant and unstable twist to their own destruction, as they also do to the rest of the scriptures.
2PE 3:17 Therefore, dear friends, since you have been forewarned, be on your guard that you do not get led astray by the error of these unprincipled men and fall from your firm grasp on the truth.
2PE 3:18 But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the honor both now and on that eternal day.
1JO 1:1 This is what we proclaim to you: what was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have looked at and our hands have touched (concerning the word of life –
1JO 1:2 and the life was revealed, and we have seen and testify and announce to you the eternal life that was with the Father and was revealed to us).
1JO 1:3 What we have seen and heard we announce to you too, so that you may have fellowship with us (and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ).
1JO 1:4 Thus we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.
1JO 1:5 Now this is the gospel message we have heard from him and announce to you: God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all.
1JO 1:6 If we say we have fellowship with him and yet keep on walking in the darkness, we are lying and not practicing the truth.
1JO 1:7 But if we walk in the light as he himself is in the light, we have fellowship with one another and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.
1JO 1:8 If we say we do not bear the guilt of sin, we are deceiving ourselves and the truth is not in us.
1JO 1:9 But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous, forgiving us our sins and cleansing us from all unrighteousness.
1JO 1:10 If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar and his word is not in us.
1JO 2:1 (My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may not sin. ) But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous One,
1JO 2:2 and he himself is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for our sins but also for the whole world.
1JO 2:3 Now by this we know that we have come to know God: if we keep his commandments.
1JO 2:4 The one who says “I have come to know God” and yet does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in such a person.
1JO 2:5 But whoever obeys his word, truly in this person the love of God has been perfected. By this we know that we are in him.
1JO 2:6 The one who says he resides in God ought himself to walk just as Jesus walked.
1JO 2:7 Dear friends, I am not writing a new commandment to you, but an old commandment which you have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that you have already heard.
1JO 2:8 On the other hand, I am writing a new commandment to you which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.
1JO 2:9 The one who says he is in the light but still hates his fellow Christian is still in the darkness.
1JO 2:10 The one who loves his fellow Christian resides in the light, and there is no cause for stumbling in him.
1JO 2:11 But the one who hates his fellow Christian is in the darkness, walks in the darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
1JO 2:12 I am writing to you, little children, that your sins have been forgiven because of his name.
1JO 2:13 I am writing to you, fathers, that you have known him who has been from the beginning. I am writing to you, young people, that you have conquered the evil one.
1JO 2:14 I have written to you, children, that you have known the Father. I have written to you, fathers, that you have known him who has been from the beginning. I have written to you, young people, that you are strong, and the word of God resides in you, and you have conquered the evil one.
1JO 2:15 Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him,
1JO 2:16 because all that is in the world (the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the arrogance produced by material possessions) is not from the Father, but is from the world.
1JO 2:17 And the world is passing away with all its desires, but the person who does the will of God remains forever.
1JO 2:18 Children, it is the last hour, and just as you heard that the antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have appeared. We know from this that it is the last hour.
1JO 2:19 They went out from us, but they did not really belong to us, because if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us. But they went out from us to demonstrate that all of them do not belong to us.
1JO 2:20 Nevertheless you have an anointing from the Holy One, and you all know.
1JO 2:21 I have not written to you that you do not know the truth, but that you do know it, and that no lie is of the truth.
1JO 2:22 Who is the liar but the person who denies that Jesus is the Christ ? This one is the antichrist: the person who denies the Father and the Son.
1JO 2:23 Everyone who denies the Son does not have the Father either. The person who confesses the Son has the Father also.
1JO 2:24 As for you, what you have heard from the beginning must remain in you. If what you heard from the beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son and in the Father.
1JO 2:25 Now this is the promise that he himself made to us: eternal life.
1JO 2:26 These things I have written to you about those who are trying to deceive you.
1JO 2:27 Now as for you, the anointing that you received from him resides in you, and you have no need for anyone to teach you. But as his anointing teaches you about all things, it is true and is not a lie. Just as it has taught you, you reside in him.
1JO 2:28 And now, little children, remain in him, so that when he appears we may have confidence and not shrink away from him in shame when he comes back.
1JO 2:29 If you know that he is righteous, you also know that everyone who practices righteousness has been fathered by him.
1JO 3:1 (See what sort of love the Father has given to us: that we should be called God’s children – and indeed we are! For this reason the world does not know us: because it did not know him.
1JO 3:2 Dear friends, we are God’s children now, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. We know that whenever it is revealed we will be like him, because we will see him just as he is.
1JO 3:3 And everyone who has this hope focused on him purifies himself, just as Jesus is pure).
1JO 3:4 Everyone who practices sin also practices lawlessness; indeed, sin is lawlessness.
1JO 3:5 And you know that Jesus was revealed to take away sins, and in him there is no sin.
1JO 3:6 Everyone who resides in him does not sin; everyone who sins has neither seen him nor known him.
1JO 3:7 Little children, let no one deceive you: The one who practices righteousness is righteous, just as Jesus is righteous.
1JO 3:8 The one who practices sin is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was revealed: to destroy the works of the devil.
1JO 3:9 Everyone who has been fathered by God does not practice sin, because God’s seed resides in him, and thus he is not able to sin, because he has been fathered by God.
1JO 3:10 By this the children of God and the children of the devil are revealed: Everyone who does not practice righteousness – the one who does not love his fellow Christian – is not of God.
1JO 3:11 For this is the gospel message that you have heard from the beginning: that we should love one another,
1JO 3:12 not like Cain who was of the evil one and brutally murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his deeds were evil, but his brother’s were righteous.
1JO 3:13 Therefore do not be surprised, brothers and sisters, if the world hates you.
1JO 3:14 We know that we have crossed over from death to life because we love our fellow Christians. The one who does not love remains in death.
1JO 3:15 Everyone who hates his fellow Christian is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life residing in him.
1JO 3:16 We have come to know love by this: that Jesus laid down his life for us; thus we ought to lay down our lives for our fellow Christians.
1JO 3:17 But whoever has the world’s possessions and sees his fellow Christian in need and shuts off his compassion against him, how can the love of God reside in such a person?
1JO 3:18 Little children, let us not love with word or with tongue but in deed and truth.
1JO 3:19 And by this we will know that we are of the truth and will convince our conscience in his presence,
1JO 3:20 that if our conscience condemns us, that God is greater than our conscience and knows all things.
1JO 3:21 Dear friends, if our conscience does not condemn us, we have confidence in the presence of God,
1JO 3:22 and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do the things that are pleasing to him.
1JO 3:23 Now this is his commandment: that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he gave us the commandment.
1JO 3:24 And the person who keeps his commandments resides in God, and God in him. Now by this we know that God resides in us: by the Spirit he has given us.
1JO 4:1 Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to determine if they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
1JO 4:2 By this you know the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses Jesus as the Christ who has come in the flesh is from God,
1JO 4:3 but every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God, and this is the spirit of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming, and now is already in the world.
1JO 4:4 You are from God, little children, and have conquered them, because the one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world.
1JO 4:5 They are from the world; therefore they speak from the world’s perspective and the world listens to them.
1JO 4:6 We are from God; the person who knows God listens to us, but whoever is not from God does not listen to us. By this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of deceit.
1JO 4:7 Dear friends, let us love one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been fathered by God and knows God.
1JO 4:8 The person who does not love does not know God, because God is love.
1JO 4:9 By this the love of God is revealed in us: that God has sent his one and only Son into the world so that we may live through him.
1JO 4:10 In this is love: not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the atoning sacrifice for our sins.
1JO 4:11 Dear friends, if God so loved us, then we also ought to love one another.
1JO 4:12 No one has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God resides in us, and his love is perfected in us.
1JO 4:13 By this we know that we reside in God and he in us: in that he has given us of his Spirit.
1JO 4:14 And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.
1JO 4:15 If anyone confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God resides in him and he in God.
1JO 4:16 And we have come to know and to believe the love that God has in us. God is love, and the one who resides in love resides in God, and God resides in him.
1JO 4:17 By this love is perfected with us, so that we may have confidence in the day of judgment, because just as Jesus is, so also are we in this world.
1JO 4:18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love drives out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. The one who fears punishment has not been perfected in love.
1JO 4:19 We love because he loved us first.
1JO 4:20 If anyone says “I love God” and yet hates his fellow Christian, he is a liar, because the one who does not love his fellow Christian whom he has seen cannot love God whom he has not seen.
1JO 4:21 And the commandment we have from him is this: that the one who loves God should love his fellow Christian too.
1JO 5:1 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been fathered by God, and everyone who loves the father loves the child fathered by him.
1JO 5:2 By this we know that we love the children of God: whenever we love God and obey his commandments.
1JO 5:3 For this is the love of God: that we keep his commandments. And his commandments do not weigh us down,
1JO 5:4 because everyone who has been fathered by God conquers the world. This is the conquering power that has conquered the world: our faith.
1JO 5:5 Now who is the person who has conquered the world except the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
1JO 5:6 Jesus Christ is the one who came by water and blood – not by the water only, but by the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
1JO 5:7 For there are three that testify,
1JO 5:8 the Spirit and the water and the blood, and these three are in agreement.
1JO 5:9 If we accept the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater, because this is the testimony of God that he has testified concerning his Son.
1JO 5:10 (The one who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself; the one who does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has testified concerning his Son.)
1JO 5:11 And this is the testimony: God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
1JO 5:12 The one who has the Son has this eternal life; the one who does not have the Son of God does not have this eternal life.
1JO 5:13 I have written these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God so that you may know that you have eternal life.
1JO 5:14 And this is the confidence that we have before him: that whenever we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
1JO 5:15 And if we know that he hears us in regard to whatever we ask, then we know that we have the requests that we have asked from him.
1JO 5:16 If anyone sees his fellow Christian committing a sin not resulting in death, he should ask, and God will grant life to the person who commits a sin not resulting in death. There is a sin resulting in death. I do not say that he should ask about that.
1JO 5:17 All unrighteousness is sin, but there is sin not resulting in death.
1JO 5:18 We know that everyone fathered by God does not sin, but God protects the one he has fathered, and the evil one cannot touch him.
1JO 5:19 We know that we are from God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
1JO 5:20 And we know that the Son of God has come and has given us insight to know him who is true, and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This one is the true God and eternal life.
1JO 5:21 Little children, guard yourselves from idols.
2JO 1:1 From the elder, to an elect lady and her children, whom I love in truth (and not I alone, but also all those who know the truth),
2JO 1:2 because of the truth that resides in us and will be with us forever.
2JO 1:3 Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us from God the Father and from Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
2JO 1:4 I rejoiced greatly because I have found some of your children living according to the truth, just as the Father commanded us.
2JO 1:5 But now I ask you, lady (not as if I were writing a new commandment to you, but the one we have had from the beginning), that we love one another.
2JO 1:6 (Now this is love: that we walk according to his commandments.) This is the commandment, just as you have heard from the beginning; thus you should walk in it.
2JO 1:7 For many deceivers have gone out into the world, people who do not confess Jesus as Christ coming in the flesh. This person is the deceiver and the antichrist!
2JO 1:8 Watch out, so that you do not lose the things we have worked for, but receive a full reward.
2JO 1:9 Everyone who goes on ahead and does not remain in the teaching of Christ does not have God. The one who remains in this teaching has both the Father and the Son.
2JO 1:10 If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into your house and do not give him any greeting,
2JO 1:11 because the person who gives him a greeting shares in his evil deeds.
2JO 1:12 Though I have many other things to write to you, I do not want to do so with paper and ink, but I hope to come visit you and speak face to face, so that our joy may be complete.
2JO 1:13 The children of your elect sister greet you.
3JO 1:1 From the elder, to Gaius my dear brother, whom I love in truth.
3JO 1:2 Dear friend, I pray that all may go well with you and that you may be in good health, just as it is well with your soul.
3JO 1:3 For I rejoiced greatly when the brothers came and testified to your truth, just as you are living according to the truth.
3JO 1:4 I have no greater joy than this: to hear that my children are living according to the truth.
3JO 1:5 Dear friend, you demonstrate faithfulness by whatever you do for the brothers (even though they are strangers).
3JO 1:6 They have testified to your love before the church. You will do well to send them on their way in a manner worthy of God.
3JO 1:7 For they have gone forth on behalf of “The Name,” accepting nothing from the pagans.
3JO 1:8 Therefore we ought to support such people, so that we become coworkers in cooperation with the truth.
3JO 1:9 I wrote something to the church, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first among them, does not acknowledge us.
3JO 1:10 Therefore, if I come, I will call attention to the deeds he is doing – the bringing of unjustified charges against us with evil words! And not being content with that, he not only refuses to welcome the brothers himself, but hinders the people who want to do so and throws them out of the church!
3JO 1:11 Dear friend, do not imitate what is bad but what is good. The one who does good is of God; the one who does what is bad has not seen God.
3JO 1:12 Demetrius has been testified to by all, even by the truth itself. We also testify to him, and you know that our testimony is true.
3JO 1:13 I have many things to write to you, but I do not wish to write to you with pen and ink.
3JO 1:14 But I hope to see you right away, and we will speak face to face. Peace be with you. The friends here greet you. Greet the friends there by name.
JUD 1:1 From Jude, a slave of Jesus Christ and brother of James, to those who are called, wrapped in the love of God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ.
JUD 1:2 May mercy, peace, and love be lavished on you!
JUD 1:3 Dear friends, although I have been eager to write to you about our common salvation, I now feel compelled instead to write to encourage you to contend earnestly for the faith that was once for all entrusted to the saints.
JUD 1:4 For certain men have secretly slipped in among you – men who long ago were marked out for the condemnation I am about to describe – ungodly men who have turned the grace of our God into a license for evil and who deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
JUD 1:5 Now I desire to remind you (even though you have been fully informed of these facts once for all ) that Jesus, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, later destroyed those who did not believe.
JUD 1:6 You also know that the angels who did not keep within their proper domain but abandoned their own place of residence, he has kept in eternal chains in utter darkness, locked up for the judgment of the great Day.
JUD 1:7 So also Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighboring towns, since they indulged in sexual immorality and pursued unnatural desire in a way similar to these angels, are now displayed as an example by suffering the punishment of eternal fire.
JUD 1:8 Yet these men, as a result of their dreams, defile the flesh, reject authority, and insult the glorious ones.
JUD 1:9 But even when Michael the archangel was arguing with the devil and debating with him concerning Moses’ body, he did not dare to bring a slanderous judgment, but said, “May the Lord rebuke you!”
JUD 1:10 But these men do not understand the things they slander, and they are being destroyed by the very things that, like irrational animals, they instinctively comprehend.
JUD 1:11 Woe to them! For they have traveled down Cain’s path, and because of greed have abandoned themselves to Balaam’s error; hence, they will certainly perish in Korah’s rebellion.
JUD 1:12 These men are dangerous reefs at your love feasts, feasting without reverence, feeding only themselves. They are waterless clouds, carried along by the winds; autumn trees without fruit – twice dead, uprooted;
JUD 1:13 wild sea waves, spewing out the foam of their shame; wayward stars for whom the utter depths of eternal darkness have been reserved.
JUD 1:14 Now Enoch, the seventh in descent beginning with Adam, even prophesied of them, saying, “Look! The Lord is coming with thousands and thousands of his holy ones,
JUD 1:15 to execute judgment on all, and to convict every person of all their thoroughly ungodly deeds that they have committed, and of all the harsh words that ungodly sinners have spoken against him.”
JUD 1:16 These people are grumblers and fault-finders who go wherever their desires lead them, and they give bombastic speeches, enchanting folks for their own gain.
JUD 1:17 But you, dear friends – recall the predictions foretold by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
JUD 1:18 For they said to you, “In the end time there will come scoffers, propelled by their own ungodly desires.”
JUD 1:19 These people are divisive, worldly, devoid of the Spirit.
JUD 1:20 But you, dear friends, by building yourselves up in your most holy faith, by praying in the Holy Spirit,
JUD 1:21 maintain yourselves in the love of God, while anticipating the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ that brings eternal life.
JUD 1:22 And have mercy on those who waver;
JUD 1:23 save others by snatching them out of the fire; have mercy on others, coupled with a fear of God, hating even the clothes stained by the flesh.
JUD 1:24 Now to the one who is able to keep you from falling, and to cause you to stand, rejoicing, without blemish before his glorious presence,
JUD 1:25 to the only God our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, power, and authority, before all time, and now, and for all eternity. Amen.
REV 1:1 The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show his servants what must happen very soon. He made it clear by sending his angel to his servant John,
REV 1:2 who then testified to everything that he saw concerning the word of God and the testimony about Jesus Christ.
REV 1:3 Blessed is the one who reads the words of this prophecy aloud, and blessed are those who hear and obey the things written in it, because the time is near!
REV 1:4 From John, to the seven churches that are in the province of Asia: Grace and peace to you from “he who is,” and who was, and who is still to come, and from the seven spirits who are before his throne,
REV 1:5 and from Jesus Christ – the faithful witness, the firstborn from among the dead, the ruler over the kings of the earth. To the one who loves us and has set us free from our sins at the cost of his own blood
REV 1:6 and has appointed us as a kingdom, as priests serving his God and Father – to him be the glory and the power for ever and ever! Amen.
REV 1:7 (Look! He is returning with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him, and all the tribes on the earth will mourn because of him. This will certainly come to pass! Amen.)
REV 1:8 “I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God – the one who is, and who was, and who is still to come – the All-Powerful!
REV 1:9 I, John, your brother and the one who shares with you in the persecution, kingdom, and endurance that are in Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of the word of God and the testimony about Jesus.
REV 1:10 I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s Day when I heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
REV 1:11 saying: “Write in a book what you see and send it to the seven churches – to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.”
REV 1:12 I turned to see whose voice was speaking to me, and when I did so, I saw seven golden lampstands,
REV 1:13 and in the midst of the lampstands was one like a son of man. He was dressed in a robe extending down to his feet and he wore a wide golden belt around his chest.
REV 1:14 His head and hair were as white as wool, even as white as snow, and his eyes were like a fiery flame.
REV 1:15 His feet were like polished bronze refined in a furnace, and his voice was like the roar of many waters.
REV 1:16 He held seven stars in his right hand, and a sharp double-edged sword extended out of his mouth. His face shone like the sun shining at full strength.
REV 1:17 When I saw him I fell down at his feet as though I were dead, but he placed his right hand on me and said: “Do not be afraid! I am the first and the last,
REV 1:18 and the one who lives! I was dead, but look, now I am alive – forever and ever – and I hold the keys of death and of Hades!
REV 1:19 Therefore write what you saw, what is, and what will be after these things.
REV 1:20 The mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand and the seven golden lampstands is this: The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
REV 2:1 “To the angel of the church in Ephesus, write the following: “This is the solemn pronouncement of the one who has a firm grasp on the seven stars in his right hand – the one who walks among the seven golden lampstands:
REV 2:2 ‘I know your works as well as your labor and steadfast endurance, and that you cannot tolerate evil. You have even put to the test those who refer to themselves as apostles (but are not), and have discovered that they are false.
REV 2:3 I am also aware that you have persisted steadfastly, endured much for the sake of my name, and have not grown weary.
REV 2:4 But I have this against you: You have departed from your first love!
REV 2:5 Therefore, remember from what high state you have fallen and repent! Do the deeds you did at the first; if not, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place – that is, if you do not repent.
REV 2:6 But you do have this going for you: You hate what the Nicolaitans practice – practices I also hate.
REV 2:7 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who conquers, I will permit him to eat from the tree of life that is in the paradise of God.’
REV 2:8 “To the angel of the church in Smyrna write the following: “This is the solemn pronouncement of the one who is the first and the last, the one who was dead, but came to life:
REV 2:9 ‘I know the distress you are suffering and your poverty (but you are rich). I also know the slander against you by those who call themselves Jews and really are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
REV 2:10 Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer. The devil is about to have some of you thrown into prison so you may be tested, and you will experience suffering for ten days. Remain faithful even to the point of death, and I will give you the crown that is life itself.
REV 2:11 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one who conquers will in no way be harmed by the second death.’
REV 2:12 “To the angel of the church in Pergamum write the following: “This is the solemn pronouncement of the one who has the sharp double-edged sword:
REV 2:13 ‘I know where you live – where Satan’s throne is. Yet you continue to cling to my name and you have not denied your faith in me, even in the days of Antipas, my faithful witness, who was killed in your city where Satan lives.
REV 2:14 But I have a few things against you: You have some people there who follow the teaching of Balaam, who instructed Balak to put a stumbling block before the people of Israel so they would eat food sacrificed to idols and commit sexual immorality.
REV 2:15 In the same way, there are also some among you who follow the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
REV 2:16 Therefore, repent! If not, I will come against you quickly and make war against those people with the sword of my mouth.
REV 2:17 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who conquers, I will give him some of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and on that stone will be written a new name that no one can understand except the one who receives it.’
REV 2:18 “To the angel of the church in Thyatira writethe following: “ This is the solemn pronouncement of the Son of God, the one who has eyes like a fiery flame and whose feet are like polished bronze:
REV 2:19 ‘I know your deeds: your love, faith, service, and steadfast endurance. In fact, your more recent deeds are greater than your earlier ones.
REV 2:20 But I have this against you: You tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess, and by her teaching deceives my servants to commit sexual immorality and to eat food sacrificed to idols.
REV 2:21 I have given her time to repent, but she is not willing to repent of her sexual immorality.
REV 2:22 Look! I am throwing her onto a bed of violent illness, and those who commit adultery with her into terrible suffering, unless they repent of her deeds.
REV 2:23 Furthermore, I will strike her followers with a deadly disease, and then all the churches will know that I am the one who searches minds and hearts. I will repay each one of you what your deeds deserve.
REV 2:24 But to the rest of you in Thyatira, all who do not hold to this teaching (who have not learned the so-called “deep secrets of Satan”), to you I say: I do not put any additional burden on you.
REV 2:25 However, hold on to what you have until I come.
REV 2:26 And to the one who conquers and who continues in my deeds until the end, I will give him authority over the nations –
REV 2:27 he will rule them with an iron rod* and like clay jars he will break them to pieces,
REV 2:28 just as I have received the right to rule from my Father – and I will give him the morning star.
REV 2:29 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’
REV 3:1 “To the angel of the church in Sardis write the following: “This is the solemn pronouncement of the one who holds the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: ‘I know your deeds, that you have a reputation that you are alive, but in reality you are dead.
REV 3:2 Wake up then, and strengthen what remains that was about to die, because I have not found your deeds complete in the sight of my God.
REV 3:3 Therefore, remember what you received and heard, and obey it, and repent. If you do not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will never know at what hour I will come against you.
REV 3:4 But you have a few individuals in Sardis who have not stained their clothes, and they will walk with me dressed in white, because they are worthy.
REV 3:5 The one who conquers will be dressed like them in white clothing, and I will never erase his name from the book of life, but will declare his name before my Father and before his angels.
REV 3:6 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’
REV 3:7 “To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write the following: “This is the solemn pronouncement of the Holy One, the True One, who holds the key of David, who opens doors no one can shut, and shuts doors no one can open:
REV 3:8 ‘I know your deeds. (Look! I have put in front of you an open door that no one can shut.) I know that you have little strength, but you have obeyed my word and have not denied my name.
REV 3:9 Listen! I am going to make those people from the synagogue of Satan – who say they are Jews yet are not, but are lying – Look, I will make them come and bow down at your feet and acknowledge that I have loved you.
REV 3:10 Because you have kept my admonition to endure steadfastly, I will also keep you from the hour of testing that is about to come on the whole world to test those who live on the earth.
REV 3:11 I am coming soon. Hold on to what you have so that no one can take away your crown.
REV 3:12 The one who conquers I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will never depart from it. I will write on him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God (the new Jerusalem that comes down out of heaven from my God), and my new name as well.
REV 3:13 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’
REV 3:14 “To the angel of the church in Laodicea write the following: “This is the solemn pronouncement of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the originator of God’s creation:
REV 3:15 ‘I know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were either cold or hot!
REV 3:16 So because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I am going to vomit you out of my mouth!
REV 3:17 Because you say, “I am rich and have acquired great wealth, and need nothing,” but do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind, and naked,
REV 3:18 take my advice and buy gold from me refined by fire so you can become rich! Buy from me white clothing so you can be clothed and your shameful nakedness will not be exposed, and buy eye salve to put on your eyes so you can see!
REV 3:19 All those I love, I rebuke and discipline. So be earnest and repent!
REV 3:20 Listen! I am standing at the door and knocking! If anyone hears my voice and opens the door I will come into his home and share a meal with him, and he with me.
REV 3:21 I will grant the one who conquers permission to sit with me on my throne, just as I too conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.
REV 3:22 The one who has an ear had better hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’”
REV 4:1 After these things I looked, and there was a door standing open in heaven! And the first voice I had heard speaking to me like a trumpet said: “Come up here so that I can show you what must happen after these things.”
REV 4:2 Immediately I was in the Spirit, and a throne was standing in heaven with someone seated on it!
REV 4:3 And the one seated on it was like jasper and carnelian in appearance, and a rainbow looking like it was made of emerald encircled the throne.
REV 4:4 In a circle around the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and seated on those thrones were twenty-four elders. They were dressed in white clothing and had golden crowns on their heads.
REV 4:5 From the throne came out flashes of lightning and roaring and crashes of thunder. Seven flaming torches, which are the seven spirits of God, were burning in front of the throne
REV 4:6 and in front of the throne was something like a sea of glass, like crystal. In the middle of the throne and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes in front and in back.
REV 4:7 The first living creature was like a lion, the second creature like an ox, the third creature had a face like a man’s, and the fourth creature looked like an eagle flying.
REV 4:8 Each one of the four living creatures had six wings and was full of eyes all around and inside. They never rest day or night, saying: “ Holy Holy Holy is the Lord God, the All-Powerful, Who was and who is, and who is still to come!”
REV 4:9 And whenever the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to the one who sits on the throne, who lives forever and ever,
REV 4:10 the twenty-four elders throw themselves to the ground before the one who sits on the throne and worship the one who lives forever and ever, and they offer their crowns before his throne, saying:
REV 4:11 “You are worthy, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power, since you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created!”
REV 5:1 Then I saw in the right hand of the one who was seated on the throne a scroll written on the front and back and sealed with seven seals.
REV 5:2 And I saw a powerful angel proclaiming in a loud voice: “Who is worthy to open the scroll and to break its seals?”
REV 5:3 But no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or look into it.
REV 5:4 So I began weeping bitterly because no one was found who was worthy to open the scroll or to look into it.
REV 5:5 Then one of the elders said to me, “Stop weeping! Look, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has conquered; thus he can open the scroll and its seven seals.”
REV 5:6 Then I saw standing in the middle of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the middle of the elders, a Lamb that appeared to have been killed. He had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
REV 5:7 Then he came and took the scroll from the right hand of the one who was seated on the throne,
REV 5:8 and when he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders threw themselves to the ground before the Lamb. Each of them had a harp and golden bowls full of incense (which are the prayers of the saints).
REV 5:9 They were singing a new song: “You are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals because you were killed, and at the cost of your own blood you have purchased for God persons from every tribe, language, people, and nation.
REV 5:10 You have appointed them as a kingdom and priests to serve our God, and they will reign on the earth.”
REV 5:11 Then I looked and heard the voice of many angels in a circle around the throne, as well as the living creatures and the elders. Their number was ten thousand times ten thousand – thousands times thousands –
REV 5:12 all of whom were singing in a loud voice: “Worthy is the lamb who was killed to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might and honor and glory and praise!”
REV 5:13 Then I heard every creature – in heaven, on earth, under the earth, in the sea, and all that is in them – singing: “To the one seated on the throne and to the Lamb be praise, honor, glory, and ruling power forever and ever!”
REV 5:14 And the four living creatures were saying “Amen,” and the elders threw themselves to the ground and worshiped.
REV 6:1 I looked on when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying with a thunderous voice, “Come!”
REV 6:2 So I looked, and here came a white horse! The one who rode it had a bow, and he was given a crown, and as a conqueror he rode out to conquer.
REV 6:3 Then when the Lamb opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, “Come!”
REV 6:4 And another horse, fiery red, came out, and the one who rode it was granted permission to take peace from the earth, so that people would butcher one another, and he was given a huge sword.
REV 6:5 Then when the Lamb opened the third seal I heard the third living creature saying, “Come!” So I looked, and here came a black horse! The one who rode it had a balance scale in his hand.
REV 6:6 Then I heard something like a voice from among the four living creatures saying, “A quart of wheat will cost a day’s pay and three quarts of barley will cost a day’s pay. But do not damage the olive oil and the wine!”
REV 6:7 Then when the Lamb opened the fourth seal I heard the voice of the fourth living creature saying, “Come!”
REV 6:8 So I looked and here came a pale green horse! The name of the one who rode it was Death, and Hades followed right behind. They were given authority over a fourth of the earth, to kill its population with the sword, famine, and disease, and by the wild animals of the earth.
REV 6:9 Now when the Lamb opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been violently killed because of the word of God and because of the testimony they had given.
REV 6:10 They cried out with a loud voice, “How long, Sovereign Master, holy and true, before you judge those who live on the earth and avenge our blood?”
REV 6:11 Each of them was given a long white robe and they were told to rest for a little longer, until the full number was reached of both their fellow servants and their brothers who were going to be killed just as they had been.
REV 6:12 Then I looked when the Lamb opened the sixth seal, and a huge earthquake took place; the sun became as black as sackcloth made of hair, and the full moon became blood red;
REV 6:13 and the stars in the sky fell to the earth like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when shaken by a fierce wind.
REV 6:14 The sky was split apart like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island was moved from its place.
REV 6:15 Then the kings of the earth, the very important people, the generals, the rich, the powerful, and everyone, slave and free, hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
REV 6:16 They said to the mountains and to the rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face of the one who is seated on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb,
REV 6:17 because the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to withstand it?”
REV 7:1 After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of the earth so no wind could blow on the earth, on the sea, or on any tree.
REV 7:2 Then I saw another angel ascending from the east, who had the seal of the living God. He shouted out with a loud voice to the four angels who had been given permission to damage the earth and the sea:
REV 7:3 “Do not damage the earth or the sea or the trees until we have put a seal on the foreheads of the servants of our God.”
REV 7:4 Now I heard the number of those who were marked with the seal, one hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed from all the tribes of the people of Israel:
REV 7:5 From the tribe of Judah, twelve thousand were sealed, from the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand,
REV 7:6 from the tribe of Asher, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Naphtali, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Manasseh, twelve thousand,
REV 7:7 from the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Issachar, twelve thousand,
REV 7:8 from the tribe of Zebulun, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Joseph, twelve thousand, from the tribe of Benjamin, twelve thousand were sealed.
REV 7:9 After these things I looked, and here was an enormous crowd that no one could count, made up of persons from every nation, tribe, people, and language, standing before the throne and before the Lamb dressed in long white robes, and with palm branches in their hands.
REV 7:10 They were shouting out in a loud voice, “Salvation belongs to our God, to the one seated on the throne, and to the Lamb!”
REV 7:11 And all the angels stood there in a circle around the throne and around the elders and the four living creatures, and they threw themselves down with their faces to the ground before the throne and worshiped God,
REV 7:12 saying, “Amen! Praise and glory, and wisdom and thanksgiving, and honor and power and strength be to our God for ever and ever. Amen!”
REV 7:13 Then one of the elders asked me, “These dressed in long white robes – who are they and where have they come from?”
REV 7:14 So I said to him, “My lord, you know the answer.” Then he said to me, “These are the ones who have come out of the great tribulation. They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb!
REV 7:15 For this reason they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his temple, and the one seated on the throne will shelter them.
REV 7:16 They will never go hungry or be thirsty again, and the sun will not beat down on them, nor any burning heat,
REV 7:17 because the Lamb in the middle of the throne will shepherd them and lead them to springs of living water, and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.”
REV 8:1 Now when the Lamb opened the seventh seal there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
REV 8:2 Then I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
REV 8:3 Another angel holding a golden censer came and was stationed at the altar. A large amount of incense was given to him to offer up, with the prayers of all the saints, on the golden altar that is before the throne.
REV 8:4 The smoke coming from the incense, along with the prayers of the saints, ascended before God from the angel’s hand.
REV 8:5 Then the angel took the censer, filled it with fire from the altar, and threw it on the earth, and there were crashes of thunder, roaring, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
REV 8:6 Now the seven angels holding the seven trumpets prepared to blow them.
REV 8:7 The first angel blew his trumpet, and there was hail and fire mixed with blood, and it was thrown at the earth so that a third of the earth was burned up, a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green grass was burned up.
REV 8:8 Then the second angel blew his trumpet, and something like a great mountain of burning fire was thrown into the sea. A third of the sea became blood,
REV 8:9 and a third of the creatures living in the sea died, and a third of the ships were completely destroyed.
REV 8:10 Then the third angel blew his trumpet, and a huge star burning like a torch fell from the sky; it landed on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water.
REV 8:11 (Now the name of the star is Wormwood.) So a third of the waters became wormwood, and many people died from these waters because they were poisoned.
REV 8:12 Then the fourth angel blew his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them were darkened. And there was no light for a third of the day and for a third of the night likewise.
REV 8:13 Then I looked, and I heard an eagle flying directly overhead, proclaiming with a loud voice, “Woe! Woe! Woe to those who live on the earth because of the remaining sounds of the trumpets of the three angels who are about to blow them!”
REV 9:1 Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from the sky to the earth, and he was given the key to the shaft of the abyss.
REV 9:2 He opened the shaft of the abyss and smoke rose out of it like smoke from a giant furnace. The sun and the air were darkened with smoke from the shaft.
REV 9:3 Then out of the smoke came locusts onto the earth, and they were given power like that of the scorpions of the earth.
REV 9:4 They were told not to damage the grass of the earth, or any green plant or tree, but only those people who did not have the seal of God on their forehead.
REV 9:5 The locusts were not given permission to kill them, but only to torture them for five months, and their torture was like that of a scorpion when it stings a person.
REV 9:6 In those days people will seek death, but will not be able to find it; they will long to die, but death will flee from them.
REV 9:7 Now the locusts looked like horses equipped for battle. On their heads were something like crowns similar to gold, and their faces looked like men’s faces.
REV 9:8 They had hair like women’s hair, and their teeth were like lions’ teeth.
REV 9:9 They had breastplates like iron breastplates, and the sound of their wings was like the noise of many horse-drawn chariots charging into battle.
REV 9:10 They have tails and stingers like scorpions, and their ability to injure people for five months is in their tails.
REV 9:11 They have as king over them the angel of the abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek, Apollyon.
REV 9:12 The first woe has passed, but two woes are still coming after these things!
REV 9:13 Then the sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a single voice coming from the horns on the golden altar that is before God,
REV 9:14 saying to the sixth angel, the one holding the trumpet, “Set free the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates!”
REV 9:15 Then the four angels who had been prepared for this hour, day, month, and year were set free to kill a third of humanity.
REV 9:16 The number of soldiers on horseback was two hundred million; I heard their number.
REV 9:17 Now this is what the horses and their riders looked like in my vision: The riders had breastplates that were fiery red, dark blue, and sulfurous yellow in color. The heads of the horses looked like lions’ heads, and fire, smoke, and sulfur came out of their mouths.
REV 9:18 A third of humanity was killed by these three plagues, that is, by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur that came out of their mouths.
REV 9:19 For the power of the horses resides in their mouths and in their tails, because their tails are like snakes, having heads that inflict injuries.
REV 9:20 The rest of humanity, who had not been killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands, so that they did not stop worshiping demons and idols made of gold, silver, bronze, stone, and wood – idols that cannot see or hear or walk about.
REV 9:21 Furthermore, they did not repent of their murders, of their magic spells, of their sexual immorality, or of their stealing.
REV 10:1 Then I saw another powerful angel descending from heaven, wrapped in a cloud, with a rainbow above his head; his face was like the sun and his legs were like pillars of fire.
REV 10:2 He held in his hand a little scroll that was open, and he put his right foot on the sea and his left on the land.
REV 10:3 Then he shouted in a loud voice like a lion roaring, and when he shouted, the seven thunders sounded their voices.
REV 10:4 When the seven thunders spoke, I was preparing to write, but just then I heard a voice from heaven say, “Seal up what the seven thunders spoke and do not write it down.”
REV 10:5 Then the angel I saw standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven
REV 10:6 and swore by the one who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and what is in it, and the earth and what is in it, and the sea and what is in it, “There will be no more delay!
REV 10:7 But in the days when the seventh angel is about to blow his trumpet, the mystery of God is completed, just as he has proclaimed to his servants the prophets.”
REV 10:8 Then the voice I had heard from heaven began to speak to me again, “Go and take the open scroll in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.”
REV 10:9 So I went to the angel and asked him to give me the little scroll. He said to me, “Take the scroll and eat it. It will make your stomach bitter, but it will be as sweet as honey in your mouth.”
REV 10:10 So I took the little scroll from the angel’s hand and ate it, and it did taste as sweet as honey in my mouth, but when I had eaten it, my stomach became bitter.
REV 10:11 Then they told me: “You must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, languages, and kings.”
REV 11:1 Then a measuring rod like a staff was given to me, and I was told, “Get up and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and the ones who worship there.
REV 11:2 But do not measure the outer courtyard of the temple; leave it out, because it has been given to the Gentiles, and they will trample on the holy city for forty-two months.
REV 11:3 And I will grant my two witnesses authority to prophesy for 1,260 days, dressed in sackcloth.
REV 11:4 (These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of the earth.)
REV 11:5 If anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouths and completely consumes their enemies. If anyone wants to harm them, they must be killed this way.
REV 11:6 These two have the power to close up the sky so that it does not rain during the time they are prophesying. They have power to turn the waters to blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague whenever they want.
REV 11:7 When they have completed their testimony, the beast that comes up from the abyss will make war on them and conquer them and kill them.
REV 11:8 Their corpses will lie in the street of the great city that is symbolically called Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord was also crucified.
REV 11:9 For three and a half days those from every people, tribe, nation, and language will look at their corpses, because they will not permit them to be placed in a tomb.
REV 11:10 And those who live on the earth will rejoice over them and celebrate, even sending gifts to each other, because these two prophets had tormented those who live on the earth.
REV 11:11 But after three and a half days a breath of life from God entered them, and they stood on their feet, and tremendous fear seized those who were watching them.
REV 11:12 Then they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them: “Come up here!” So the two prophets went up to heaven in a cloud while their enemies stared at them.
REV 11:13 Just then a major earthquake took place and a tenth of the city collapsed; seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.
REV 11:14 The second woe has come and gone; the third is coming quickly.
REV 11:15 Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven saying: “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign for ever and ever.”
REV 11:16 Then the twenty-four elders who are seated on their thrones before God threw themselves down with their faces to the ground and worshiped God
REV 11:17 with these words: “We give you thanks, Lord God, the All-Powerful, the one who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun to reign.
REV 11:18 The nations were enraged, but your wrath has come, and the time has come for the dead to be judged, and the time has come to give to your servants, the prophets, their reward, as well as to the saints and to those who revere your name, both small and great, and the time has come to destroy those who destroy the earth.”
REV 11:19 Then the temple of God in heaven was opened and the ark of his covenant was visible within his temple. And there were flashes of lightning, roaring, crashes of thunder, an earthquake, and a great hailstorm.
REV 12:1 Then a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and with the moon under her feet, and on her head was a crown of twelve stars.
REV 12:2 She was pregnant and was screaming in labor pains, struggling to give birth.
REV 12:3 Then another sign appeared in heaven: a huge red dragon that had seven heads and ten horns, and on its heads were seven diadem crowns.
REV 12:4 Now the dragon’s tail swept away a third of the stars in heaven and hurled them to the earth. Then the dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that he might devour her child as soon as it was born.
REV 12:5 So the woman gave birth to a son, a male child, who is going to rule over all the nations with an iron rod. Her child was suddenly caught up to God and to his throne,
REV 12:6 and she fled into the wilderness where a place had been prepared for her by God, so she could be taken care of for 1,260 days.
REV 12:7 Then war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back.
REV 12:8 But the dragon was not strong enough to prevail, so there was no longer any place left in heaven for him and his angels.
REV 12:9 So that huge dragon – the ancient serpent, the one called the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world – was thrown down to the earth, and his angels along with him.
REV 12:10 Then I heard a loud voice in heaven saying, “The salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the ruling authority of his Christ, have now come, because the accuser of our brothers and sisters, the one who accuses them day and night before our God, has been thrown down.
REV 12:11 But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, and they did not love their lives so much that they were afraid to die.
REV 12:12 Therefore you heavens rejoice, and all who reside in them! But woe to the earth and the sea because the devil has come down to you! He is filled with terrible anger, for he knows that he only has a little time!”
REV 12:13 Now when the dragon realized that he had been thrown down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
REV 12:14 But the woman was given the two wings of a giant eagle so that she could fly out into the wilderness, to the place God prepared for her, where she is taken care of – away from the presence of the serpent – for a time, times, and half a time.
REV 12:15 Then the serpent spouted water like a river out of his mouth after the woman in an attempt to sweep her away by a flood,
REV 12:16 but the earth came to her rescue; the ground opened up and swallowed the river that the dragon had spewed from his mouth.
REV 12:17 So the dragon became enraged at the woman and went away to make war on the rest of her children, those who keep God’s commandments and hold to the testimony about Jesus. And the dragon stood on the sand of the seashore.
REV 13:1 Then I saw a beast coming up out of the sea. It had ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns were ten diadem crowns, and on its heads a blasphemous name.
REV 13:2 Now the beast that I saw was like a leopard, but its feet were like a bear’s, and its mouth was like a lion’s mouth. The dragon gave the beast his power, his throne, and great authority to rule.
REV 13:3 One of the beast’s heads appeared to have been killed, but the lethal wound had been healed. And the whole world followed the beast in amazement;
REV 13:4 they worshiped the dragon because he had given ruling authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast too, saying: “Who is like the beast?” and “Who is able to make war against him?”
REV 13:5 The beast was given a mouth speaking proud words and blasphemies, and he was permitted to exercise ruling authority for forty-two months.
REV 13:6 So the beast opened his mouth to blaspheme against God – to blaspheme both his name and his dwelling place, that is, those who dwell in heaven.
REV 13:7 The beast was permitted to go to war against the saints and conquer them. He was given ruling authority over every tribe, people, language, and nation,
REV 13:8 and all those who live on the earth will worship the beast, everyone whose name has not been written since the foundation of the world in the book of life belonging to the Lamb who was killed.
REV 13:9 If anyone has an ear, he had better listen!
REV 13:10 If anyone is meant for captivity, into captivity he will go. If anyone is to be killed by the sword, then by the sword he must be killed. This requires steadfast endurance and faith from the saints.
REV 13:11 Then I saw another beast coming up from the earth. He had two horns like a lamb, but was speaking like a dragon.
REV 13:12 He exercised all the ruling authority of the first beast on his behalf, and made the earth and those who inhabit it worship the first beast, the one whose lethal wound had been healed.
REV 13:13 He performed momentous signs, even making fire come down from heaven in front of people
REV 13:14 and, by the signs he was permitted to perform on behalf of the beast, he deceived those who live on the earth. He told those who live on the earth to make an image to the beast who had been wounded by the sword, but still lived.
REV 13:15 The second beast was empowered to give life to the image of the first beast so that it could speak, and could cause all those who did not worship the image of the beast to be killed.
REV 13:16 He also caused everyone (small and great, rich and poor, free and slave ) to obtain a mark on their right hand or on their forehead.
REV 13:17 Thus no one was allowed to buy or sell things unless he bore the mark of the beast – that is, his name or his number.
REV 13:18 This calls for wisdom: Let the one who has insight calculate the beast’s number, for it is man’s number, and his number is 666.
REV 14:1 Then I looked, and here was the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him were one hundred and forty-four thousand, who had his name and his Father’s name written on their foreheads.
REV 14:2 I also heard a sound coming out of heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder. Now the sound I heard was like that made by harpists playing their harps,
REV 14:3 and they were singing a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders. No one was able to learn the song except the one hundred and forty-four thousand who had been redeemed from the earth.
REV 14:4 These are the ones who have not defiled themselves with women, for they are virgins. These are the ones who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were redeemed from humanity as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb,
REV 14:5 and no lie was found on their lips; they are blameless.
REV 14:6 Then I saw another angel flying directly overhead, and he had an eternal gospel to proclaim to those who live on the earth – to every nation, tribe, language, and people.
REV 14:7 He declared in a loud voice: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has arrived, and worship the one who made heaven and earth, the sea and the springs of water!”
REV 14:8 A second angel followed the first, declaring: “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great city! She made all the nations drink of the wine of her immoral passion.”
REV 14:9 A third angel followed the first two, declaring in a loud voice: “If anyone worships the beast and his image, and takes the mark on his forehead or his hand,
REV 14:10 that person will also drink of the wine of God’s anger that has been mixed undiluted in the cup of his wrath, and he will be tortured with fire and sulfur in front of the holy angels and in front of the Lamb.
REV 14:11 And the smoke from their torture will go up forever and ever, and those who worship the beast and his image will have no rest day or night, along with anyone who receives the mark of his name.”
REV 14:12 This requires the steadfast endurance of the saints – those who obey God’s commandments and hold to their faith in Jesus.
REV 14:13 Then I heard a voice from heaven say, “Write this: ‘Blessed are the dead, those who die in the Lord from this moment on!’” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “so they can rest from their hard work, because their deeds will follow them.”
REV 14:14 Then I looked, and a white cloud appeared, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man! He had a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
REV 14:15 Then another angel came out of the temple, shouting in a loud voice to the one seated on the cloud, “Use your sickle and start to reap, because the time to reap has come, since the earth’s harvest is ripe!”
REV 14:16 So the one seated on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was reaped.
REV 14:17 Then another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he too had a sharp sickle.
REV 14:18 Another angel, who was in charge of the fire, came from the altar and called in a loud voice to the angel who had the sharp sickle, “Use your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of grapes off the vine of the earth, because its grapes are now ripe.”
REV 14:19 So the angel swung his sickle over the earth and gathered the grapes from the vineyard of the earth and tossed them into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
REV 14:20 Then the winepress was stomped outside the city, and blood poured out of the winepress up to the height of horses’ bridles for a distance of almost two hundred miles.
REV 15:1 Then I saw another great and astounding sign in heaven: seven angels who have seven final plagues (they are final because in them God’s anger is completed).
REV 15:2 Then I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who had conquered the beast and his image and the number of his name. They were standing by the sea of glass, holding harps given to them by God.
REV 15:3 They sang the song of Moses the servant of God and the song of the Lamb: “Great and astounding are your deeds, Lord God, the All-Powerful! Just and true are your ways, King over the nations!
REV 15:4 Who will not fear you, O Lord, and glorify your name, because you alone are holy? All nations will come and worship before you for your righteous acts have been revealed.”
REV 15:5 After these things I looked, and the temple (the tent of the testimony) was opened in heaven,
REV 15:6 and the seven angels who had the seven plagues came out of the temple, dressed in clean bright linen, wearing wide golden belts around their chests.
REV 15:7 Then one of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls filled with the wrath of God who lives forever and ever,
REV 15:8 and the temple was filled with smoke from God’s glory and from his power. Thus no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues from the seven angels were completed.
REV 16:1 Then I heard a loud voice from the temple declaring to the seven angels: “Go and pour out on the earth the seven bowls containing God’s wrath.”
REV 16:2 So the first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth. Then ugly and painful sores appeared on the people who had the mark of the beast and who worshiped his image.
REV 16:3 Next, the second angel poured out his bowl on the sea and it turned into blood, like that of a corpse, and every living creature that was in the sea died.
REV 16:4 Then the third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and the springs of water, and they turned into blood.
REV 16:5 Now I heard the angel of the waters saying: “You are just – the one who is and who was, the Holy One – because you have passed these judgments,
REV 16:6 because they poured out the blood of your saints and prophets, so you have given them blood to drink. They got what they deserved!”
REV 16:7 Then I heard the altar reply, “Yes, Lord God, the All-Powerful, your judgments are true and just!”
REV 16:8 Then the fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was permitted to scorch people with fire.
REV 16:9 Thus people were scorched by the terrible heat, yet they blasphemed the name of God, who has ruling authority over these plagues, and they would not repent and give him glory.
REV 16:10 Then the fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast so that darkness covered his kingdom, and people began to bite their tongues because of their pain.
REV 16:11 They blasphemed the God of heaven because of their sufferings and because of their sores, but nevertheless they still refused to repent of their deeds.
REV 16:12 Then the sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates and dried up its water to prepare the way for the kings from the east.
REV 16:13 Then I saw three unclean spirits that looked like frogs coming out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
REV 16:14 For they are the spirits of the demons performing signs who go out to the kings of the earth to bring them together for the battle that will take place on the great day of God, the All-Powerful.
REV 16:15 (Look! I will come like a thief! Blessed is the one who stays alert and does not lose his clothes so that he will not have to walk around naked and his shameful condition be seen.)
REV 16:16 Now the spirits gathered the kings and their armies to the place that is called Armageddon in Hebrew.
REV 16:17 Finally the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air and a loud voice came out of the temple from the throne, saying: “It is done!”
REV 16:18 Then there were flashes of lightning, roaring, and crashes of thunder, and there was a tremendous earthquake – an earthquake unequaled since humanity has been on the earth, so tremendous was that earthquake.
REV 16:19 The great city was split into three parts and the cities of the nations collapsed. So Babylon the great was remembered before God, and was given the cup filled with the wine made of God’s furious wrath.
REV 16:20 Every island fled away and no mountains could be found.
REV 16:21 And gigantic hailstones, weighing about a hundred pounds each, fell from heaven on people, but they blasphemed God because of the plague of hail, since it was so horrendous.
REV 17:1 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke to me. “Come,” he said, “I will show you the condemnation and punishment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters,
REV 17:2 with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality and the earth’s inhabitants got drunk with the wine of her immorality.”
REV 17:3 So he carried me away in the Spirit to a wilderness, and there I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was full of blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns.
REV 17:4 Now the woman was dressed in purple and scarlet clothing, and adorned with gold, precious stones, and pearls. She held in her hand a golden cup filled with detestable things and unclean things from her sexual immorality.
REV 17:5 On her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, the Mother of prostitutes and of the detestable things of the earth.”
REV 17:6 I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the saints and the blood of those who testified to Jesus. I was greatly astounded when I saw her.
REV 17:7 But the angel said to me, “Why are you astounded? I will interpret for you the mystery of the woman and of the beast with the seven heads and ten horns that carries her.
REV 17:8 The beast you saw was, and is not, but is about to come up from the abyss and then go to destruction. The inhabitants of the earth – all those whose names have not been written in the book of life since the foundation of the world – will be astounded when they see that the beast was, and is not, but is to come.
REV 17:9 (This requires a mind that has wisdom.) The seven heads are seven mountains the woman sits on. They are also seven kings:
REV 17:10 five have fallen; one is, and the other has not yet come, but whenever he does come, he must remain for only a brief time.
REV 17:11 The beast that was, and is not, is himself an eighth king and yet is one of the seven, and is going to destruction.
REV 17:12 The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but will receive ruling authority as kings with the beast for one hour.
REV 17:13 These kings have a single intent, and they will give their power and authority to the beast.
REV 17:14 They will make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb will conquer them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, and those accompanying the Lamb are the called, chosen, and faithful.”
REV 17:15 Then the angel said to me, “The waters you saw (where the prostitute is seated) are peoples, multitudes, nations, and languages.
REV 17:16 The ten horns that you saw, and the beast – these will hate the prostitute and make her desolate and naked. They will consume her flesh and burn her up with fire.
REV 17:17 For God has put into their minds to carry out his purpose by making a decision to give their royal power to the beast until the words of God are fulfilled.
REV 17:18 As for the woman you saw, she is the great city that has sovereignty over the kings of the earth.”
REV 18:1 After these things I saw another angel, who possessed great authority, coming down out of heaven, and the earth was lit up by his radiance.
REV 18:2 He shouted with a powerful voice: “Fallen, fallen, is Babylon the great! She has become a lair for demons, a haunt for every unclean spirit, a haunt for every unclean bird, a haunt for every unclean and detested beast.
REV 18:3 For all the nations have fallen from the wine of her immoral passion, and the kings of the earth have committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth have gotten rich from the power of her sensual behavior.”
REV 18:4 Then I heard another voice from heaven saying, “Come out of her, my people, so you will not take part in her sins and so you will not receive her plagues,
REV 18:5 because her sins have piled up all the way to heaven and God has remembered her crimes.
REV 18:6 Repay her the same way she repaid others; pay her back double corresponding to her deeds. In the cup she mixed, mix double the amount for her.
REV 18:7 As much as she exalted herself and lived in sensual luxury, to this extent give her torment and grief because she said to herself, ‘I rule as queen and am no widow; I will never experience grief!’
REV 18:8 For this reason, she will experience her plagues in a single day: disease, mourning, and famine, and she will be burned down with fire, because the Lord God who judges her is powerful!”
REV 18:9 Then the kings of the earth who committed immoral acts with her and lived in sensual luxury with her will weep and wail for her when they see the smoke from the fire that burns her up.
REV 18:10 They will stand a long way off because they are afraid of her torment, and will say, “Woe, woe, O great city, Babylon the powerful city! For in a single hour your doom has come!”
REV 18:11 Then the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn for her because no one buys their cargo any longer –
REV 18:12 cargo such as gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple cloth, silk, scarlet cloth, all sorts of things made of citron wood, all sorts of objects made of ivory, all sorts of things made of expensive wood, bronze, iron and marble,
REV 18:13 cinnamon, spice, incense, perfumed ointment, frankincense, wine, olive oil and costly flour, wheat, cattle and sheep, horses and four-wheeled carriages, slaves and human lives.
REV 18:14 (The ripe fruit you greatly desired has gone from you, and all your luxury and splendor have gone from you – they will never ever be found again!)
REV 18:15 The merchants who sold these things, who got rich from her, will stand a long way off because they are afraid of her torment. They will weep and mourn,
REV 18:16 saying, “Woe, woe, O great city – dressed in fine linen, purple and scarlet clothing, and adorned with gold, precious stones, and pearls –
REV 18:17 because in a single hour such great wealth has been destroyed!” And every ship’s captain, and all who sail along the coast – seamen, and all who make their living from the sea, stood a long way off
REV 18:18 and began to shout when they saw the smoke from the fire that burned her up, “Who is like the great city?”
REV 18:19 And they threw dust on their heads and were shouting with weeping and mourning, “Woe, Woe, O great city – in which all those who had ships on the sea got rich from her wealth – because in a single hour she has been destroyed!”
REV 18:20 (Rejoice over her, O heaven, and you saints and apostles and prophets, for God has pronounced judgment against her on your behalf!)
REV 18:21 Then one powerful angel picked up a stone like a huge millstone, threw it into the sea, and said, “With this kind of sudden violent force Babylon the great city will be thrown down and it will never be found again!
REV 18:22 And the sound of the harpists, musicians, flute players, and trumpeters will never be heard in you again. No craftsman who practices any trade will ever be found in you again; the noise of a mill will never be heard in you again.
REV 18:23 Even the light from a lamp will never shine in you again! The voices of the bridegroom and his bride will never be heard in you again. For your merchants were the tycoons of the world, because all the nations were deceived by your magic spells!
REV 18:24 The blood of the saints and prophets was found in her, along with the blood of all those who had been killed on the earth.”
REV 19:1 After these things I heard what sounded like the loud voice of a vast throng in heaven, saying, “Hallelujah! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God,
REV 19:2 because his judgments are true and just. For he has judged the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and has avenged the blood of his servants poured out by her own hands!”
REV 19:3 Then a second time the crowd shouted, “Hallelujah!” The smoke rises from her forever and ever.
REV 19:4 The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures threw themselves to the ground and worshiped God, who was seated on the throne, saying: “Amen! Hallelujah!”
REV 19:5 Then a voice came from the throne, saying: “Praise our God all you his servants, and all you who fear Him, both the small and the great!”
REV 19:6 Then I heard what sounded like the voice of a vast throng, like the roar of many waters and like loud crashes of thunder. They were shouting: “Hallelujah! For the Lord our God, the All-Powerful, reigns!
REV 19:7 Let us rejoice and exult and give him glory, because the wedding celebration of the Lamb has come, and his bride has made herself ready.
REV 19:8 She was permitted to be dressed in bright, clean, fine linen” (for the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the saints).
REV 19:9 Then the angel said to me, “Write the following: Blessed are those who are invited to the banquet at the wedding celebration of the Lamb!” He also said to me, “These are the true words of God.”
REV 19:10 So I threw myself down at his feet to worship him, but he said, “Do not do this! I am only a fellow servant with you and your brothers who hold to the testimony about Jesus. Worship God, for the testimony about Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.”
REV 19:11 Then I saw heaven opened and here came a white horse! The one riding it was called “Faithful” and “True,” and with justice he judges and goes to war.
REV 19:12 His eyes are like a fiery flame and there are many diadem crowns on his head. He has a name written that no one knows except himself.
REV 19:13 He is dressed in clothing dipped in blood, and he is called the Word of God.
REV 19:14 The armies that are in heaven, dressed in white, clean, fine linen, were following him on white horses.
REV 19:15 From his mouth extends a sharp sword, so that with it he can strike the nations. He will rule them with an iron rod, and he stomps the winepress of the furious wrath of God, the All-Powerful.
REV 19:16 He has a name written on his clothing and on his thigh: “King of kings and Lord of lords.”
REV 19:17 Then I saw one angel standing in the sun, and he shouted in a loud voice to all the birds flying high in the sky: “Come, gather around for the great banquet of God,
REV 19:18 to eat your fill of the flesh of kings, the flesh of generals, the flesh of powerful people, the flesh of horses and those who ride them, and the flesh of all people, both free and slave, and small and great!”
REV 19:19 Then I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies assembled to do battle with the one who rode the horse and with his army.
REV 19:20 Now the beast was seized, and along with him the false prophet who had performed the signs on his behalf – signs by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped his image. Both of them were thrown alive into the lake of fire burning with sulfur.
REV 19:21 The others were killed by the sword that extended from the mouth of the one who rode the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves with their flesh.
REV 20:1 Then I saw an angel descending from heaven, holding in his hand the key to the abyss and a huge chain.
REV 20:2 He seized the dragon – the ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan – and tied him up for a thousand years.
REV 20:3 The angel then threw him into the abyss and locked and sealed it so that he could not deceive the nations until the one thousand years were finished. (After these things he must be released for a brief period of time.)
REV 20:4 Then I saw thrones and seated on them were those who had been given authority to judge. I also saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony about Jesus and because of the word of God. These had not worshiped the beast or his image and had refused to receive his mark on their forehead or hand. They came to life and reigned with Christ for a thousand years.
REV 20:5 (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were finished.) This is the first resurrection.
REV 20:6 Blessed and holy is the one who takes part in the first resurrection. The second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and they will reign with him for a thousand years.
REV 20:7 Now when the thousand years are finished, Satan will be released from his prison
REV 20:8 and will go out to deceive the nations at the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to bring them together for the battle. They are as numerous as the grains of sand in the sea.
REV 20:9 They went up on the broad plain of the earth and encircled the camp of the saints and the beloved city, but fire came down from heaven and devoured them completely.
REV 20:10 And the devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet are too, and they will be tormented there day and night forever and ever.
REV 20:11 Then I saw a large white throne and the one who was seated on it; the earth and the heaven fled from his presence, and no place was found for them.
REV 20:12 And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne. Then books were opened, and another book was opened – the book of life. So the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to their deeds.
REV 20:13 The sea gave up the dead that were in it, and Death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each one was judged according to his deeds.
REV 20:14 Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death – the lake of fire.
REV 20:15 If anyone’s name was not found written in the book of life, that person was thrown into the lake of fire.
REV 21:1 Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and earth had ceased to exist, and the sea existed no more.
REV 21:2 And I saw the holy city – the new Jerusalem – descending out of heaven from God, made ready like a bride adorned for her husband.
REV 21:3 And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying: “Look! The residence of God is among human beings. He will live among them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them.
REV 21:4 He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death will not exist any more – or mourning, or crying, or pain, for the former things have ceased to exist.”
REV 21:5 And the one seated on the throne said: “Look! I am making all things new!” Then he said to me, “Write it down, because these words are reliable and true.”
REV 21:6 He also said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To the one who is thirsty I will give water free of charge from the spring of the water of life.
REV 21:7 The one who conquers will inherit these things, and I will be his God and he will be my son.
REV 21:8 But to the cowards, unbelievers, detestable persons, murderers, the sexually immoral, and those who practice magic spells, idol worshipers, and all those who lie, their place will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur. That is the second death.”
REV 21:9 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven final plagues came and spoke to me, saying, “Come, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb!”
REV 21:10 So he took me away in the Spirit to a huge, majestic mountain and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God.
REV 21:11 The city possesses the glory of God; its brilliance is like a precious jewel, like a stone of crystal-clear jasper.
REV 21:12 It has a massive, high wall with twelve gates, with twelve angels at the gates, and the names of the twelve tribes of the nation of Israel are written on the gates.
REV 21:13 There are three gates on the east side, three gates on the north side, three gates on the south side and three gates on the west side.
REV 21:14 The wall of the city has twelve foundations, and on them are the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
REV 21:15 The angel who spoke to me had a golden measuring rod with which to measure the city and its foundation stones and wall.
REV 21:16 Now the city is laid out as a square, its length and width the same. He measured the city with the measuring rod at fourteen hundred miles (its length and width and height are equal).
REV 21:17 He also measured its wall, one hundred forty-four cubits according to human measurement, which is also the angel’s.
REV 21:18 The city’s wall is made of jasper and the city is pure gold, like transparent glass.
REV 21:19 The foundations of the city’s wall are decorated with every kind of precious stone. The first foundation is jasper, the second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth emerald,
REV 21:20 the fifth onyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
REV 21:21 And the twelve gates are twelve pearls – each one of the gates is made from just one pearl! The main street of the city is pure gold, like transparent glass.
REV 21:22 Now I saw no temple in the city, because the Lord God – the All-Powerful – and the Lamb are its temple.
REV 21:23 The city does not need the sun or the moon to shine on it, because the glory of God lights it up, and its lamp is the Lamb.
REV 21:24 The nations will walk by its light and the kings of the earth will bring their grandeur into it.
REV 21:25 Its gates will never be closed during the day (and there will be no night there).
REV 21:26 They will bring the grandeur and the wealth of the nations into it,
REV 21:27 but nothing ritually unclean will ever enter into it, nor anyone who does what is detestable or practices falsehood, but only those whose names are written in the Lamb’s book of life.
REV 22:1 Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life – water as clear as crystal – pouring out from the throne of God and of the Lamb,
REV 22:2 flowing down the middle of the city’s main street. On each side of the river is the tree of life producing twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit every month of the year. Its leaves are for the healing of the nations.
REV 22:3 And there will no longer be any curse, and the throne of God and the Lamb will be in the city. His servants will worship him,
REV 22:4 and they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
REV 22:5 Night will be no more, and they will not need the light of a lamp or the light of the sun, because the Lord God will shine on them, and they will reign forever and ever.
REV 22:6 Then the angel said to me, “These words are reliable and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants what must happen soon.”
REV 22:7 (Look! I am coming soon! Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy expressed in this book.)
REV 22:8 I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things, and when I heard and saw them, I threw myself down to worship at the feet of the angel who was showing them to me.
REV 22:9 But he said to me, “Do not do this! I am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers the prophets, and with those who obey the words of this book. Worship God!”
REV 22:10 Then he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy contained in this book, because the time is near.
REV 22:11 The evildoer must continue to do evil, and the one who is morally filthy must continue to be filthy. The one who is righteous must continue to act righteously, and the one who is holy must continue to be holy.”
REV 22:12 (Look! I am coming soon, and my reward is with me to pay each one according to what he has done!
REV 22:13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end!)
REV 22:14 Blessed are those who wash their robes so they can have access to the tree of life and can enter into the city by the gates.
REV 22:15 Outside are the dogs and the sorcerers and the sexually immoral, and the murderers, and the idolaters and everyone who loves and practices falsehood!
REV 22:16 “I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star!”
REV 22:17 And the Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And let the one who hears say: “Come!” And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who wants it take the water of life free of charge.
REV 22:18 I testify to the one who hears the words of the prophecy contained in this book: If anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues described in this book.
REV 22:19 And if anyone takes away from the words of this book of prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life and in the holy city that are described in this book.
REV 22:20 The one who testifies to these things says, “Yes, I am coming soon!” Amen! Come, Lord Jesus!
REV 22:21 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.
